Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Wisconsin communities are fed up with government inaction on water contamination When Jeff Lamont attended high school 60 years ago, a local company that produced military-grade firefighting foam would invite science classes to practice extinguishing fires. Now he fights water contamination. By John Ernst October 24, 2024 | 5:00am CDT When Jeff Lamont attended high school in Marinette, Wisconsin 60 years ago, a local company that produced military-grade firefighting foam would invite science classes to practice extinguishing fires, including his. The company would set off accelerants, Lamont and his classmates would extinguish the fires with the foam, and fire hoses would wash away the residue. But it wasn’t just science classes that were practicing these techniques. Companies would test their foam on open ground without containment, leaving leftover foam to seep into the ground, flooding nearby rivers and streams with contaminants. This process continued for decades. The main contaminants in this foam were per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAs), which have been detected in wells all over the state. Known as “forever chemicals,” PFAs are manufactured chemicals that break down very slowly over extended periods of time, commonly found in firefighting foam, other chemical manufacturing and even household items such as nonstick cookware or shampoo, according to the EPA. In 2017, Tyco, which has since been bought by Johnson Controls, first reported to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that they had found PFAs in their private wells. Lamont told The Daily Cardinal the company asked to test him and his neighbors wells in Peshtigo and found unsafe levels of PFAs. The findings led Lamont and a few other community members to form S.O.H2O or Save Our Water, an organization that worked to inform the public about the toxicity of PFAs and pressure the state for groundwater, drinking water and surface water standards. Lamont, who is a retired hydrologist and has investigated water systems throughout his career, dug deeper. While looking at the Tyco reports and DNR investigations, most of which centered around the safety of the accelerants used to start fires, he discovered that Tyco first found PFAs in their wells in 2014 but didn’t alert the DNR for another three years. “They allowed the citizens in this community to drink that contaminated water for three years before they notified the DNR of it,” Lamont said. Save Our Water took the fight to the Wisconsin Capitol, where there are signs of slow progress, Peter Burress, the government affairs manager for Wisconsin Conservation Voters, told the Cardinal. He and his organization have worked closely with Lamont and Save Our Water. After Marinette found PFAs in their wells, more voluntary testing and community pressure led to cases of PFAs springing up all over the state. In August 2022, the DNR proposed new PFAs standards for drinking water, groundwater and surface water, including a 20 parts per trillion restriction on drinking water and groundwater as well as an eight parts per trillion cap on surface water. Only the latter passed with some restrictions, and the voting Natural Resources Board, primarily appointed by former Gov. Scott Walker, agreed on a 70 parts per trillion cap on drinking water. The Board shot down a groundwater restriction entirely. The state has never had standards on PFAs in groundwater, the source of drinking water for two-thirds of Wisconsin residents, according to Burress. “Many of those communities who are first impacted and have been dealing with this issue the longest are still fighting for a groundwater standard,” Burress told the Cardinal. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email A second attempt to pass groundwater standards late last year was halted by the REINS Act, a piece of Walker-era legislation that requires state legislative authorization of administrative rules that carry compliance and implementation costs of $10 million or more over a two-year period. In May 2023, GOP lawmakers in the Legislature’s budget-writing committee set aside $125 million for a fund to sponsor the removal of PFAs. But the money has sat in the fund as lawmakers from both sides of the aisle have been unable to agree on the proper way to release the funds to the DNR. With the funding frozen, citizens continue to suffer. From Burress’s perspective, previously gerrymandered districts that have since been revised by Gov. Tony Evers will be the key to progress. Citizens will be more responsive to their legislators with fairer districts, he said. “We know that safe drinking water is popular. If you talk to any legislator, they'll say, ‘I support a clean environment,’” Burress said. “A near supermajority in this Legislature has been able to completely ignore what folks across the state from both sides of the aisle are demanding.” The federal government is unable to assist with any of the groundwater standards that many organizations hope will be passed, but Burress said the Biden-Harris administration has also been instrumental in the effort. In April, the EPA announced the first-ever national drinking water standard for six types of PFAs, capping the two most common, PFOA and PFOS, at four parts per trillion . The standard will give communities three years to test their water and inform the public, with systems needing to implement solutions to decrease PFAs in their drinking water in the next five years — a “huge step,” Burress said. “These are the first new drinking water standards established by the EPA in 27 years, which is wild, and they got it done,” he said. But back in small communities like Marinette, the wait for funding has dragged on for so long, residents are simply tired of fighting, according to Lamont. “[Residents] just want it to be over,” Lamont said. ”It's unfortunate, but that's kind of the blue collar mentality we have in this community. [We]'ve been fighting for six or seven years and look, it's gotten us nothing.” Still, Lamont, Buress and other advocates persist, hopeful to bring change with the upcoming November elections. Groundwater standards and a counter to the REINS Act to release funding will be on the agenda. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Johnathan Dye | The Daily Cardinal VOLLEYBALL Badger volleyball gets swept by No. 2 Nebraska for second time this season The Nebraska Cornhuskers have not swept the Badgers twice in one season since 2012. By Eliana Mann November 27, 2024 | 4:32pm CST Raucous fans packed the Bob Devaney Sports Center in Lincoln, Nebraska Saturday evening to watch the No. 6 University of Wisconsin-Madison volleyball team take on the No. 2 University of Nebraska. The last time these two heavyweight teams competed against each other, Nebraska came away with a dominant three-set win in Madison at the beginning of November. Their second match-up ended the same way, marking the first time since 2012 that Nebraska has swept Wisconsin twice in one season. The Badgers won the first point of the senior night match in Nebraska with a kill by fifth-year outside hitter Sarah Franklin. But the Huskers responded with a seven-point run, and the Badgers were never able to retake the lead. A kill from senior outside hitter Taylor Landfair gave the Huskers set one, 25-21. In similar fashion to the first set, the second set got off to a shaky start for the Badgers due to a six-point Nebraska run. Later in the set, though, Wisconsin strung together four points that included three massive blocks. Fifth-year middle blocker CC Crawford earned a service ace to bring the Badgers within one point of the Huskers. The two teams traded points back and forth from there, but an unfortunate overpass by the Badgers resulted in another Landfair kill to win the set for Nebraska, 25-22. The third set seemed to be going better for the Badgers as they started off with a 3-1 lead. Senior right-side hitter Anna Smrek earned two blocks in the first four Wisconsin points to help build their lead. Although Wisconsin started the set on a 5-2 run, Nebraska quickly responded with a 9-1 run of their own. Nebraska’s energy remained high, feeding off the enthusiasm of their fans. A kill from senior outside hitter Merritt Beason closed out the set 25-17 in favor of the Huskers. Despite losing the match, the Badgers out-blocked the Huskers 11-7. Junior middle blocker Carter Booth earned six of those blocks, while Smrek contributed five. As a team, the Badgers hit just .169 on the match. Franklin led the team with 10 kills, Booth had seven and Smrek had six. Freshman libero Lola Schumacher was still out with an injury, so redshirt freshman Saige Damrow got her third consecutive start at libero. She earned nine digs against the Huskers. Freshman setter Charlie Fuerbringer continued to perform well with 27 assists. With this win, Nebraska ended their regular season at home with an impressive 41-match win streak. Wisconsin has two more matches at home to end the season, and the next one is on Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. against Ohio State at the UW Field House. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin's location at 3706 Orin Road on Madison's east side. Photo by Tyler Katzenberger | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH UW-Madison's female students brace for a Trump presidency as IUD appointments surge nationally Female UW-Madison students brace for a Trump presidency as IUD appointments surge nationally. By Annika Bereny December 5, 2024 | 6:00am CST For many women on campus who voted for Vice President Kamala Harris, the next few days were filled with anxiety, worry and a decision to get an intrauterine device. For Kat Sattel, a sophomore at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, waking up Wednesday morning meant calling her mother to discuss contraceptive options. “I had a phone call with my mom where I discussed how fearful I was,” Sattel said. “And by that afternoon, I had made an appointment with UHS to have a consultation about [getting an IUD].” Demand for IUDs and other forms of birth control increased nearly 22% in the 30 days after President-elect Donald Trump’s 2016 election, a 2019 study found. This election has shown similar, if not elevated, results of the same phenomenon. Searches for “IUD appointment” increased 100% on Nov. 5, and searches for ‘planned parenthood’ jumped 40% in the 24 hours after the election. Sattel cited the potential repeal of the Affordable Care Act by the Trump administration, an Obama administration policy that makes the birth control pill free, as the main reason for her decision. “It is not an easy expense, to have to pay for birth control every three months,” Sattel said. “The reason that I want to get an IUD is because of how long it lasts and that it would be longer than any presidential term.” Sexual health company Winx Health reported a 966% increase in sales of their emergency contraceptive pill in the 60 hours following the election. Planned Parenthood reported appointments for IUDs across the nation increased by 760% in the 24 hours after the election, birth control implants saw a 350% increase and vasectomy appointments increased by 1200%. In Wisconsin, there has long been worry about a ban on emergency contraception, but the elections of Democratic Gov. Tony Evers and liberal-leaning Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Janet Protasiewicz have kept them at bay. In Wisconsin, calls to Planned Parenthood have increased since the election, Analiese Eicher, director of communications for Planned Parenthood Advocates of Wisconsin told The Daily Cardinal. “Our community-facing folks and our health centers are receiving a lot of questions, and there's a lot of uncertainty,” she said. UW-Madison junior Annabel Allen said she decided to get an IUD earlier in the summer because of the uncertainty surrounding who would win the election. “‘I should definitely just get an IUD with the upcoming election,’” Allen said she remembered thinking. “‘Because I don't want to take any chances.’” Over the summer, Allen, a Louisiana native, visited her home of New Orleans and said it made her feel the stakes of the election even more. Louisiana is currently a state with a full abortion ban, except in cases where the mother’s life is in danger or the pregnancy is “medically futile.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Being home and being in Louisiana obviously makes those issues feel a little bit more present,” Allen said. “When Roe v. Wade got overturned, it was like Planned Parenthood disappeared off the face of the earth at home, and I just think about all the women who don't get that reproductive health care anymore, which is really disappointing and scary.” But Allen had her IUD placed incorrectly and experienced severe side effects, such as hormonal mood swings, irregular bleeding and painful cramps for the six months she had it before ultimately removing it. A 2014 UW-Stout study reported 78% of women who had never given birth experienced moderate to severe pain during their IUD placement. Just months ago, in late August, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated their recommendations and now urge health care providers to counsel patients about pain management before the procedure. “You can just feel your body trying to reject it, which is such an odd feeling,” Allen said. “It made me sad, because I was like, ‘Why do I have to do this?’ I'm glad that I have this option, and it was easy and it's accessible, but I just was like, ‘Why do I even have to do this in the first place?’” Dissonance between the severe pain felt from IUDs and the benefits it provides has led to disillusionment in some cases. But birth control has always been a form of reproductive autonomy in the face of what many women see as male apathy to the consequences of unprotected sex. And, with young male voters’ rightward shift this election, more women are getting IUDs as a way to protect themselves and their reproductive rights. “Prior to the election, I was speaking to a lot of guys our age who go to this university, and they were very secretive and almost ashamed of if they were voting for Trump,” Sattel said. “The second that he won the election, they’ve come out of the woodwork saying blatantly misogynistic, blatantly homophobic things. It's really scary to know that they feel like they have that power and feel able to get away with that without any sort of repercussions.” One viral tweet that circulated after the election and has become a phrase used to troll women upset about the results of the election came from neo-Nazi Nick Fuentes reading, “Your body, my choice. Forever.” Allen said, like Sattel, she’s noticed men saying extremely “disrespectful and dehumanizing” statements online since Trump’s election. “Clearly, I've been stuck in this little bubble,” Allen said. “There are lots of people and lots of men out there who have no respect for women or their bodies.” But the election results and the emboldening of the anti-choice cause does not mean hope is lost, Eicher said. PPWI resumed performing abortions in Milwaukee and Madison clinics in late 2023, despite the 1848 ban still being in effect. “We are open and provide this full spectrum of reproductive and sexual health care, including abortion. The Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin doors remain open,” Eicher said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Pro-Palestine protesters call for divestment outside of a Board of Regents meeting at Gordon Dining and Event Center at 8:00 a.m. on December 5, 2024. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS 19 arrested after pro-Palestine protesters interrupt Board of Regents meeting The University of Wisconsin-Madison Police Department arrested and detained 19 protesters at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. All were released without citations at this time. By Annika Bereny and Mary Bosch December 5, 2024 | 3:58pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison Police Department arrested 19 people at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. Thursday after 50 pro-Palestine protesters disrupted a Board of Regents meeting, demanding the university to financially and socially divest from Israel. Footage posted by Students for a Democratic Society Madison shows officers attempting to escort the group of protesters out of Gordon's. The protesters chanted “We won’t leave” as an officer said, “It’s time to go.” In the background, other members were being handcuffed and led out of another door as the larger group continued chanting “Free Palestine.” UWPD detained the 19 protesters in Gordon Commons for a short period, prompting social media posts from UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine and other groups urging people to call UWPD and ask for the release of those detained. All were released without citations at this time. A Daily Cardinal reporter saw seven or eight police cars in the parking lot outside Sellery Residence Hall at 9 a.m. After the disruption, police officers prevented the public and even some UW officials from accessing the Regents meeting, despite it continuing inside. A UW-Madison police officer said the situation represented a “safety issue” and that they could watch the livestream. A Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reporter reminded police the meeting is open to the public under state law and there didn't appear to be a sufficient safety issue for the meeting to be halted. The reporter was later let inside. About 15 of those protesting were students from UW-Milwaukee, where a dozen UWM protesters held a one-minute disruption at a Board of Regents meeting last spring. “It's been a year of this genocide — more and more people die every day that we don't take action," said Audari Tamayo, an arrested UW-Milwaukee protester. “And for that, they punished us.” UWPD said “each [of today’s] cases will be investigated, and citations could be issued in the future,” in a press release Thursday. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal The Badgers quarterback announced his intentions to enter the transfer portal. By Tomer Ronen December 11, 2024 | 2:12pm CST Wisconsin Badgers quarterback Braedyn Locke announced his intention to enter the NCAA transfer portal with two years of eligibility remaining Wednesday. The sophomore from Rockwall, Texas, started nine games in 2024, passing for 1,936 yards, 13 touchdowns and 10 interceptions after Tyler Van Dyke was ruled out for the season to injury against Alabama. “Thank you to the University of Wisconsin, the coaches, and my teammates for an unforgettable two years,” Locke said on Twitter Wednesday. “I’ll always cherish my time here.” Locke started three games in 2023 after starting quarterback Tanner Mordecai went down against Iowa. He threw an interception in all but one start in 2024, leading the team to a 3-6 record as the starter. Locke’s younger brother, three-star quarterback Landyn Locke, signed his letter of intent with the Badgers on Dec. 4, leaving optimism the sophomore might stay. The Badgers’ projected quarterback room consists of true freshman Mabrey Mettauer and 2025 recruits Carter Smith and Landyn Locke. Locke is the third Badgers quarterback to enter the portal following Van Dyke and redshirt freshman Cole LaCrue. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Liam Beran | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Motion picture with a pitcher: What to expect from a Terrace movie night By Noah Fellinger June 8, 2023 | 2:00am CDT The Wisconsin Union Directorate (WUD) hosted a screening Monday evening of the critically acclaimed 2019 film “Booksmart,” directed by Olivia Wilde, on the iconic Memorial Union Terrace. “Booksmart” is the latest in the WUD Film Committee’s ongoing “Lakeside Cinema” series, which will bring a variety of crowd-pleasing films to the Memorial Union Terrace each Monday this summer. “Booksmart” is the second film to be screened so far and the first of two films chosen to honor Pride month alongside the 1999 cult classic “But I’m A Cheerleader.” Other movies scheduled for the 2023 season include “Black Panther,” “High School Musical 2” and “The Big Lebowski.” I attended Monday’s screening to give you a glimpse of what to expect from summer films at the terrace. I arrived at the Memorial Union Terrace well in advance of the “Booksmart” screening, which was a wise choice. Like most nights during the summer, the Terrace buzzed with the sounds of chatter, laughter and pitcher clatter. Though there were plenty of tables available at the Terrace, not all had a good view of the screen, and most which did had already been taken by the time I arrived. I was lucky to stake out a decent spot. Regardless, there was an easygoing revelry to the event. Everyone was in good spirits, and most were probably drinking them too. Food and drink are within easy reach at the Union, even if on the pricier side. The weather was superb for a day on the Terrace. Cool air rolled off the lake — which was beautiful as ever — tempering the summer heat. As the sun set, the rippling water turned to copper; a truly picturesque locale for a film screening. Belly full and lulled by the pleasant chatter of a busy Terrace, I couldn’t help but feel at ease — perfectly primed to sit back and enjoy a film. I knew little about “Booksmart” going in, aside from the fact that it and last year’s “Don’t Worry Darling” were both directed by Olivia Wilde. I was pleasantly surprised to find the film to be quite funny and charming, even if it was yet another in a long line of coming-of-age stories. The reveal near the beginning of the movie — wherein the two overachieving leads, Amy (Beanie Feldstein) and Molly (Kaitlyn Dever), discover that their peers got into top colleges despite also partying on the weekends — was a clever and hilarious twist on a classic high school trope. While the lake served as a picturesque movie backdrop, seeing a film at the Terrace comes with a few hiccups you won’t find at most indoor theaters. For one, the Union is not exactly an environment free of distraction. Although things quieted somewhat once the film began, the normal drone of conversation continued throughout the majority of the movie. It wasn’t too difficult to ignore, but it might become an annoyance to those who are easily distracted. Additionally, depending on where you sit, you might find that people are blocking your view of the screen — I myself had trouble reading the subtitles in a few scenes. Regardless, the picture and sound quality were quite good, and I found myself engrossed in the film anyway. The appeal of the Lakeside Cinema series isn’t that it's the perfect viewing experience, but that it combines the warmth and cheerfulness of a warm summer evening at the Union with a night at home watching a movie with friends. Perfect isn’t the point. It would be a lie if I said that I didn’t have a good time watching “Booksmart” at the Union this past Monday. The film wasn’t on my radar prior to the event, but I’m glad to have seen it. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The age of streaming has given us near-unlimited choice in what to watch. But one small pleasure which has become elusive since the days of Blockbuster is the delight of taking a chance on a film you haven’t heard of and hasn’t been hand-picked by an algorithm. Consider taking a chance on one of the WUD Film Committee’s Lakeside Cinema screenings, especially if they’re showing something you aren’t familiar with. Even if the film isn’t up your alley, you’re guaranteed a fun and relaxing evening on the Memorial Union Terrace. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Noah FellingerNoah Fellinger is an Arts Editor for The Daily Cardinal. He's covered the performing arts, new film and television releases, and labor issues in the arts. Follow him on Twitter at @Noah_Fellinger. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Photo by Aimon Van Houten | The Daily Cardinal SPORTS Wisconsin hosts NCAA Cross Country Championships in thrilling end to season The Wisconsin men’s cross country team outperformed expectations in a star-studded field, while the women’s team fell short. By Aimon Van Houten November 26, 2024 | 1:46pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison cross country team were back on their home course for the fourth and final time of the season, hosting the NCAA Cross Country Championships for the first time since 2018 when Badgers’ alumni Morgan McDonald took home the individual title. Though race conditions were far from perfect — soft ground and a slight wind exacerbated the chilly morning air — the extremely talented fields from both the men’s and women’s races assured that fast times were in order. The women’s 6k race went first, and the Badgers women placed 22nd out of 31 teams for the second year in a row. Despite being ranked 14th in the nation, the women were buried early in the race with their frontrunner all the way back in 99th place through the halfway point. Though they still could have salvaged the race, the women failed to move up when they needed to. Senior Lindsay Cunningham was the first to cross the line for the Badgers, placing 111th with a time of 20:36.6. Sophomore Annika Cutforth (20:46.4), senior Shae Ruhly (20:47.2), sophomore Bella Jacobsen (20:48.0), senior Carolyn Shult (20:51.8) and freshman Nora Gremban (20:52.7) finished soon after. None of the Badgers improved from their times at Pre-Nationals just one month ago. Sophomore Doris Lemngole from Alabama won the race as an individual with a time of 19:21.0, beating out New Mexico freshman Pamela Kosgei, owner of the current course record with her win at Pre Nationals in October. No. 1 Brigham Young University won the team title by 17 points over No. 4 West Virginia. The Badger men’s 10k race started off in the same fashion as the women’s. The men were all the way back in 27th place through the 1k of the race, with their frontrunner in 123rd. But this was their worst positioning in the race, as each scorer climbed over 100 places before the last kilometer. Graduate student Bob Liking had an excellent race to end his career as a Badger, climbing over 150 places by the end of the race to finish 16th in the nation (29:09.2). He was just one second off breaking the previous course record (29:08.3), which was taken down by 14 separate runners. Behind Liking, the Badgers had a powerful pack of four runners split by just 10 seconds. Though starting off conservatively, they each moved up 1k throughout the race, eventually dropping Wisconsin’s team score from 27th to fourth. Senior Adam Spencer (29:30.1) led the way for the pack, with sophomore Micah Wilson (29:34.4), freshman Matan Ivri (29:36.2) and freshman Christian de Vaal (29:40.5) not far behind. The No. 7 Badgers exceeded their expectations by placing fourth overall, upsetting powerhouses like No. 2 Oklahoma State and No. 5 New Mexico along the way. Harvard senior and 2024 Olympian Graham Blanks completed his repeat title after winning individually in last year’s meet. Blanks came through with a time of 28:37.2, beating the previous course record by a jaw-dropping 31.1 seconds. No. 1 ranked Brigham Young University also won the men's team title with a score of 124. This marked the first time a university won both team titles since Colorado pulled it off in 2002. The Badger’s impressive fourth-place finish was a big improvement from the previous year’s 10th. In front of a hometown crowd at Thomas Zimmer, the men finished off a very satisfying season with a huge victory. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Melissa Agard speaks at a TAA - AFT outside of the Board of Regents meeting on August 22, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Melissa Agard wins Dane County executive race Sen. Melissa Agard, D-Madison, defeated Dane County Supervisor Dana Pellebon for the county’s top seat Tuesday night. By Joseph Panzer November 5, 2024 | 11:35pm CST In a special election on Tuesday night, Sen. Melissa Agard, D-Madison, won the Dane County executive race over challenger Dana Pellebon. Agard received 61% of the vote at 74.6% of precincts reporting — a 23.3% margin over Pellebon’s 37.7%. Declaring victory in a speech at the Embassy Suites hotel in downtown Madison, Agard affirmed her interest in finding togetherness as executive. “We are one community and with a shared set of values grounded in equity, in progress and innovation, we can move our county forward,” Agard said. The election was called after former Dane County Executive Joe Parisi announced in October 2023 that he would be retiring. Since stepping down in May, the position has been filled by former Dane County Supervisor Jamie Kuhn. Agard and Pellebon landed on the ballot after defeating candidates Wes Sparkman and Regina Vidaver in the August primary. The county executive is responsible for overseeing county government departments, approving or vetoing resolutions from the Board of Supervisors and submitting the annual budget to the county board. Agard previously told the Cardinal that as county executive, she will prioritize including student perspectives on housing affordability issues to address cost of living concerns. In a Q&A with the Cap Times, Agard has also said that addressing climate concerns, racial disparities and prioritizing workforce development and small businesses will be goals of her administration. Agard will serve until the end of Parisi’s term in April 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of Sarah Sapp/Flickr SCIENCE Though threat is low, agencies monitor bird flu in Wisconsin as cases rise nationally As of Monday, 21 Wisconsin counties, including southern Barron, Bayfield, Columbia, Rock, Sauk and Jefferson counties, have reported cases of bird flu, affecting a total of around 3.6 million birds since March 2022. By Nicole Steele December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST A highly contagious virus known as Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, or the bird flu, has spread among poultry flocks and affected around 112 million birds since February 2022. Though the bird flu primarily affects poultry, it has been spreading throughout the dairy cattle industry. Common symptoms for poultry include sudden death with no apparent illness, lack of energy or appetite, decrease in egg production, stumbling or diarrhea — however, poultry flocks can also be asymptomatic. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) monitors the amount of commercial and noncommercial bird operations that have been exposed to the bird flu. As of Monday, 21 Wisconsin counties, including southern Columbia, Rock, Sauk and Jefferson counties, have reported cases of bird flu, affecting a total of around 3.6 million birds since March 2022. Among those affected are 17 commercial flocks and 19 backyard flocks in Wisconsin, according to the USDA. All commercial operations were or are being quarantined. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) monitors bird flu in wild bird and waterfowl populations. In some cases, wild birds and waterfowl carry the illness within their gastrointestinal tract without showing signs of sickness, while rare strains can cause severe disease. Symptoms for wild birds and waterfowl include sneezing, coughing, nasal discharge, falling, tremors, circling, abnormal head positions, diarrhea or green colored feces. The risk of humans contracting the virus without animal contact is quite low, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. People exposed to infected or potentially infected animals, or in environments with possible virus exposure, are at higher risk for contracting the bird flu. The current risk of contracting the bird flu for the general public is low, and no human cases have currently been reported in Wisconsin. The first case of avian influenza in dairy cattle in the United States was in March of 2024, and now 15 states and 695 dairy herds have been affected. The first human infection transmitted from a dairy cow in the United States was in April of 2024. There have been 57 total cases of human infection since April, with 34 of those cases being from cattle alone. Human symptoms can range from mild eye infections and upper respiratory symptoms to more severe pneumonia and death. Humans can contract the virus through the nose, eyes or mouth by contact or breathing of air droplets, infected feces, saliva, mucous or touching areas with virus droplets and then touching themselves. The bird flu can also spread to other mammals outside the dairy cattle industry including red foxes, otters, minks and bobcats. These mammals are at risk for ingesting the illness because they scavenge or hunt for birds. The best way to prevent the spread of bird flu is through biosecurity measures, such as reducing visitors, washing hands frequently, wearing disposable boot covers or foot baths, changing clothes before and after exiting flocks and cleaning tools. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
The Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel in Paris photographed on Kodak 200 gold film on Jun. 18, 2024. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE How I learned to stop worrying and love the grain A love letter to film photography in all of its forms and a guide on how to get started By Jake Piper October 17, 2024 | 2:00am CDT All too often, I feel lost in my own camera roll. A confusing blur of faces and places I half remember amassed over eight years of owning a phone. The thousands of photos virtually weightless in my pocket. But what if I told you there was a different way, something that could give weight back to your photos and give them the meaning they deserve? Well, let me introduce you to the world of film photography. Photography has been around in some form for almost 200 years, with the first widely available photographs being expensive copper-plated daguerreotypes introduced in 1839. Since then, photography has come a long way. With the 35mm film everyone knows and loves which Kodak introduced in 1934 and gained popularity in the 1960s as the primary way to take pictures. The first thing that always strikes me about film photography is the beautiful physicality of it. How the shutter of each film camera has its own distinctive clack or the telltale crackle of a winding spool loading film into the next frame. The second thing that always hits me is the raw, imperfect nature of film. The vibrant palettes of any given film stock and the subtlety of the film’s natural grain give each photo a unique, dreamy quality that could never be replicated on the precise machining of a digital camera. There’s something within that imperfection and natural fuzziness that I think appeals to a lot of people on a base level. We as humans often tend to gravitate towards nostalgia, a rose-tinted interpretation of the past, and with film photography that feeling can be had in the modern day too. It allows us to relive our favorite moments in perpetuity, captured in a rose-colored frame of film. There’s something to be said for working for your photos as well. Because each roll of film only offers a maximum of 36 shots, each and every shot counts. The limitations of a roll of film are what breed the creativity that can be found within. Switching to film allowed me to think about each and every photo I take, it required conscious effort each time I held the camera up to my face, carefully metering and compositing before each shot, trying desperately to make each frame count. It’s a satisfying experience, following your photo from birth to completion, eagerly awaiting your scans to finally see how something turned out. It’s truly an addicting and magical process, and something I sincerely hope you get hooked on too. Where to begin? One of the questions any budding film photographer might first ask is “where do I even get a film camera?” The answer is simpler than it might seem. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Ebay can be a great place to start if you want something on the cheaper end that is guaranteed to work. With prices ranging anywhere from $5 to $500, though, it can be an intimidating place to start. If you want a more local option, you have two alternatives. While pretty hit or miss, Goodwill and St. Vinny’s often have old film cameras lying around that can be had for very cheap. Otherwise, if you want to support a local business, The Camera Company with locations on the West Side and the East Side of Madison, offer a range of great, professionally refurbished film cameras to choose from along with selling and developing film. But my advice to anyone staring out is that as long as the camera works and it’s in your price range, what brand or lens it is really doesn’t matter! Once you have a camera, what then? Well, if you’re looking for a good beginner film stock I recommend Kodak Gold 200. It’s cheap, can be found practically anywhere and, most importantly, it looks beautiful. Film photography is a medium that connects us back to our photos. The physical action of metering, framing and shooting grounding us in the moment of time we took that picture. After all, isn’t that what photography is all about? Capturing a moment in time, capturing us in a physical freezing of history. And film connects us to more than just the action of taking a photograph ever could. It freezes that moment in our mind too, holding the feelings, emotions and sounds we experienced along with it in our memory. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo by Cameron Schneider | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Hovde concedes to Baldwin in U.S. Senate race Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde conceded to incumbent Sen. Tammy Baldwin nearly two weeks after the Nov. 5 election. By Anna Kleiber November 18, 2024 | 2:23pm CST Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde conceded in his race against Sen. Tammy Baldwin Monday nearly two weeks after the Nov. 5 election. "As a result, and my desire not to add to political strife through a contentious recount, I have decided to concede the election," Hovde said in a video released Monday. Hovde said he didn’t regret running for the U.S. Senate, but said he would take a “much-needed break” and return to his businesses and look for “other ways to make an impact” through philanthropic work. The concession comes after Hovde released a video on Nov. 12 in which he questioned “irregularities” in the results. While Associated Press called the race for Baldwin on Nov. 6, Hovde claimed that certain precincts in Milwaukee had over 200% voter turnout, which the Wisconsin Elections Commission later refuted in a statement released Thursday. Hovde held a narrow lead over Baldwin before Milwaukee — which counts its ballots at one central location — reported its ballots. Baldwin took the lead after those results came in around 4 a.m. Nov. 6. The Milwaukee Election Commission had to recount about 34,000 ballots on Election Day after the doors of tabulator machines were not locked and sealed. Both parties agreed nothing wrong was done, according to Wisconsin Elections Commission Chair Ann Jacobs. Milwaukee is a historically heavily Democratic city, with Baldwin winning 71.5% of the vote against Wisconsin State Sen. Leah Vukmir in Milwaukee County in 2018. Hovde, who lost by about 29,000 votes, received about 54,000 fewer votes than President-elect Donald Trump. Baldwin received about 5,000 more votes than Vice President Kamala Harris. In Wisconsin, candidates can only ask for a recount if they trail by one percentage point or less. In the official tally, Hovde currently trails Baldwin by 0.9%. Wisconsin precincts have until Tuesday to certify their results, and Hovde has until Thursday to request a recount. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Wisconsin Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, speaks to reporters after Gov. Tony Evers delivered the 2024 State of the State address in the Wisconsin State Capitol building on Jan. 23, 2024. Photo by Gavin Escott | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Vos reelected Assembly speaker of slimmer Republican majority With a diminished majority, Rep. Robin Vos, R-Rochester, will lead Assembly Republicans into 2025. By Nick Bumgardner November 12, 2024 | 5:34pm CST Assembly Republicans reelected Rep. Robin Vos, R-Rochester, as Assembly speaker Tuesday afternoon, successfully fending off a challenge from Rep. Scott Allen, R-Waukesha. Vos will oversee a slim 54-45 Republican majority in the Assembly next year, down from 64 seats last term. It's the smallest majority under his leadership and the first Legislative term under new legislative maps signed by Gov. Tony Evers earlier this year. Vos declined to release the final vote count, and Allen did not attend Tuesday’s news conference. Assembly Republicans also retained Rep. Tyler August, R-Walworth, as Majority Leader. Vos, the longest serving Assembly speaker in Wisconsin, overcame opposition among others within his party and a turbulent relationship with President-elect Donald Trump. Following the 2020 election, Vos drew criticism within the party for declining to challenge the results or impeach nonpartisan Wisconsin Elections Commission Administrator Meagan Wolfe. In 2022, Vos narrowly beat back a primary challenge from Trump-endorsed Adam Steen, winning by just 260 votes. In 2024, conservative activists launched a recall petition after Vos declined to impeach Wolfe. The effort ultimately fell short, with activists failing to meet the signature requirement to force a recall. Vos was reelected comfortably in the 2024 general election. Earlier this week, Republicans reelected Devin LeMahieu as the Senate Majority Leader. Republicans lost their supermajority in the Senate and now hold a narrow 18-15 majority. Vos laid out his plans for the new term at a news conference Tuesday. He said the Assembly’s “not in a rush” to spend the state’s record surplus. Instead, Republicans will focus on fighting inflation and “putting the money [Wisconsinites] overpaid back in their wallets,” Vos said. On abortion, Vos told reporters he wants a statewide referendum to decide the future of abortion access, and though the issue is “important,” he doesn’t think it was “top of mind” for most voters in 2024. “They were worried about the price of eggs and how am I going to afford rent, and what are we going to do about making sure that we have enough money to be able to buy a new house, things that I think were much more economic faced,” Vos said. Vos also doesn’t think the election results mean Republicans need to govern differently, citing Trump’s win statewide. Instead, Vos said his job is the same as it was before: uniting his party around conservative “consensus.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I'd be curious when you ask the Democrats at the same press conference, what are the areas that you're going to look like you reflect Wisconsin that President Trump carried? Are you going to work with them to cut taxes? Are you going to work with them to reduce regulations? Are you going to find a way to say that we can't afford all the spending that you promised during the campaign?” Vos said. Vos also briefly addressed Wisconsin’s election system, saying it “by and large worked well” in 2024. Newly elected Assistant Majority Leader Rep. Scott Krug, R-Nekoosa, agreed, but he said delays at Milwaukee’s central count location made it “apparent” Republicans “have to do something” about Milwaukee absentee ballot processing. Krug praised Florida’s system, which allows absentee ballots to be processed and counted before Election Day, saying he “hopes to get support to do something similar.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Nick BumgardnerNick Bumgardner is a senior staff writer at The Daily Cardinal covering state news and politics. You can follow him on Twitter at @nickbum_. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A Board of Regents policy change will allow UW System schools to grant businesses and other organizations the naming rights to buildings, potentially creating a new revenue source. Photo by Jeff Miller | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW System’s 2024 review proposes major changes amid financial debate As the University of Wisconsin System navigates its 2024 review, sweeping proposals and financial debates bring the system’s future into focus. By Alaina Walsh December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin System faces significant financial and structural decisions following the release of its 2024 review Monday that highlights ongoing budgetary struggles and governance debates. Recommendations by a legislative committee looking into the future of the state’s public university system, to separate UW-Madison from other campuses and a contentious budget request display the challenges of balancing fiscal responsibility with educational equity. Legislative leaders remain divided on the path forward, signaling a critical juncture for Wisconsin’s higher education landscape. Earlier this year, UW System leaders requested $855 million in state funding for the 2025-27 biennium, noting that Wisconsin ranks 43rd in state funding for its public universities. The proposed funding aims to address rising operational costs, staff wage increases and initiatives supporting mental health and academic services. Legislators including Rep. Amanda Nedweski, R-Pleasant Prairie, have dismissed the request as unrealistic, pointing to Wisconsin’s higher investments in the state’s technical colleges as a mitigating factor. Among the most contentious recommendations is the potential separation of UW-Madison from the rest of the UW System. Advocate, Nedweski, argues that creating distinct governance structures could address enrollment declines and financial deficits at regional campuses while allowing Madison to leverage its unique strengths independently. Critics, including UW Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin and Gov. Tony Evers, however, warn that such a move could exacerbate inequities across the system and undermine the collective identity of Wisconsin’s public universities. Budget negotiations are further complicated by political battles over UW System diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) positions. A recent deal between the UW System and Republican legislators sought to eliminate DEI programming while releasing previously withheld pay raises and funding key infrastructure projects, including a new engineering building at UW-Madison. However, this compromise has drawn criticism from both sides, with Republicans pushing for further DEI cuts and Democrats defending the system’s inclusivity initiatives. Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, has been a central figure in these debates, advocating for ideological reforms at the state’s public universities. Last week, Vos responded to the UW System budget request saying that it was likely a nonstarter, despite UW System’s President Jay Rothman agreeing to Republican demands regarding DEI programming. Vos did not respond for a comment. With Wisconsin’s $4 billion budget surplus, stakeholders remain divided on how best to allocate resources to balance the system’s immediate needs with long-term stability. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Courtesy of Paramount Pictures. ARTS ‘Transformers One’ is the origin story we didn’t ask for but are pleased to have This action-packed thrill ride was a win for the Transformers franchise. By Oliver Ehrhardt October 2, 2024 | 2:00am CDT “Transformers One” is the perfect origin story and change of pace for the Michael Bay Transformers films. Since "Transformers: Dark of the Moon," the Transformers franchise has struggled to keep a linear story while delivering quality action sequences. Installments like “Transformers: The Last Knight” and “Transformers: Rise of the Beasts” have been underwhelming, especially after the first three films were so creative and nostalgic. Safe to say I wasn’t really looking forward to or expecting another Transformers movie, but “Transformers One” was surprisingly unique, original and funny, while handling complex themes like the difficulties of dealing with power. “Transformers One” is an origin story taking place on the planet Cybertron, the homeworld of the Transformers. Though they are sworn enemies in the Michael Bay movies, we see the early friendship between Optimus Prime and Megatron who mine for energon after the Matrix of Leadership was lost in battle, which gives life to Cybertron and is possessed by the leader of Cybertron. The main story follows Optimus Prime and Megatron, who were then known as Orion Pax and D-16 respectively, as they search for the Matrix of Leadership and discover a hidden secret among their home world. “Transformers One” has a simple yet entertaining plotline: venture out and find an artifact that will restore life to Cybertron. The third act is by far the best and most entertaining sequence of this movie. Everything unfolds so quickly, and we see Optimus Prime in true Optimus Prime form: taking down everybody around him with style and confidence. “Transformers One” is directed by Josh Cooley, who is no stranger to animated films. He directed Pixar’s “Inside Out” and “Toy Story 4,” bringing the same amount of creativity and humor to “Transformers One” while keeping the story moving. Compared to the chaotic nature of Michael Bay’s Transformers, this movie doesn’t take itself too seriously and has a very easy storyline to follow. One of the strongest parts of this movie is the way it focuses on the relationship between Orion Pax and D-16. You feel a sense of sorrow and heartbreak as the story unfolds, and I couldn’t help but feel choked up at some parts toward the end. We spend a majority of the movie getting close with these characters, which makes the ending that much more tragic. Near the end of this movie, we see two ways of thinking about what to do with the power Orion Pax and D-16 eventually get—compassion vs. domination. Optimus Prime stands for sympathy and autonomy, as the name “autobots” suggests, while Megatron wants total control and desires power for its own sake. In essence, the movie explores how to deal with enormous amounts of power and the choices made when given that power. This movie made some interesting but effective casting choices. It took a bit of getting used to hearing Chris Hemsworth’s voice for Optimus Prime, but by the end he did a great job. Other notable names include Brian Tyree Henry as D-16, Scarlett Johansson as Elita-1, a female transformer who joins Orion Pax and D-16 on their journey and Keegan-Michael Key as B-127, or Bumblebee. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email I absolutely loved Keegan-Michael Key in his role. He voiced Bumblebee so well and he was hilarious. There were some standout moments from him especially and it’s very believable that this is the same character we see in the Michael Bay movies. I laughed anytime he referred to himself as “badassatron,” trying to make the nickname stick, although it never did. I have to admit I started rewatching all the Transformers movies, and the nostalgia is starting to hit. I really liked some of the callbacks to the Bay films, like introductions to Decepticons Soundwave and Shockwave and also showing how Starscream got his unique voice. I loved this movie, and I am hoping it will get even better on rewatch. Rating: 4.5/5 stars “Transformers One” is now playing in theaters. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Jordan Ellenberg Courtesy of Davey Hubay SCIENCE Science Sit-Down: Jordan Ellenberg talks AI research, student engagement University of Wisconsin-Madison math professor Jordan Ellenberg sits down with The Daily Cardinal to discuss his latest AI research and writing and student work. By Sonia Bendre September 12, 2024 | 3:00am CDT University of Wisconsin-Madison math professor Jordan Ellenberg eats pizza weekly with other Discovery Fellows and department professors, stimulating discussion about new topics in science. Most recently, Ellenberg has taken an interest in artificial intelligence and spent time working on a project with Google Deepmind to brainstorm different uses for the tool in the mathematical discipline. “They had a very wonderful idea of using a large language model to generate chunks of code that are supposed to sort of help you with a certain mathematical problem,” Ellenberg told The Daily Cardinal. “It's pretty fun to read codes in a machine mode and try to learn stuff.” After graduating with a Ph.D. in math from Harvard University in 1998, Ellenberg took a position as a postdoctoral student at the Simon Laufer Mathematical Sciences Institute. He taught at Princeton University for eight years before becoming an Assistant Professor at UW-Madison, where he remains a professor today. Ellenberg’s research background in number theory, geometry Ellenberg primarily studies number theory and algebraic geometry, both areas within the greater field of pure mathematics. He now holds the positions of John D. MacArthur Professor and Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professor at the UW-Madison, as well as of a Cornell A.D. White Professor at Large. The John D. MacArthur professorship recognizes distinguished scholars in research, the Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professorship recognizes exceptional scholarship as well as teaching and service and the Cornell A.D. White Professorship is considered one of the most prestigious distinctions in an academic’s career. “A lot of my research is in very traditional, very classical areas of number theory… It's sort of saying, here's an equation. Does it have solutions? Can you find whole numbers that solve it?” Ellenberg said. “That's a very, very old kind of question. We still basically don't know anything about it. I mean, we had a few thousand years to work on it, and we're making some progress.” For Ellenberg, teaching is a way to tell stories about math. “Every single thing we use was invented by some person, for some reason, for some problem they were trying to do. I find it really useful to bring that into the classroom,” Ellenberg said. Ellenberg has also published three books, including a novel called “The Grasshopper King.” His books “How Not to Be Wrong” and “Shape” combine statistical data and mathematics with storytelling techniques. Ellenberg also writes a blog, called Quomodocumque. “I have a long-term goal of trying to figure out how to teach and how to talk about this process of writing about science, writing about math. A lot of people do it, and there's clearly a demand, but hardly anyone's trained in it. There's no process to writing about data,” Ellenberg said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Among other classes, Ellenberg teaches a first-year interest group called “Writing and Data,” which focuses on teaching students to synthesize data into news and scientific writing. By the end of the first-year interest group, students are expected to create a magazine-style piece. His goal: talk to and support non-scientists. “There’s a way that you learn in high school to write an academic paper, and, in your classes here, when you write, there's a certain academic style…but that's not really the way we explain stuff to the general public. And for scientists who are working, there's a way to write a journal article, but it's also its own separate style,” he said. ‘The students here are really eager to learn’ Ellenberg shared his thoughts on one of the more controversial areas of math curriculum education: the Common Core, a set of standards for English and mathematics education for kindergarten through high school students. Ellenberg, an advocate of the curriculum, has written extensively on the Common Core and K-12 education in periodicals like The New York Times and The Washington Post. “I basically think it's like a very solid set of goals. It's pretty ambitious, and it sets pretty high standards,” Ellenberg said. “One thing that it really centers, and I think is very right, is that the ability to do arithmetic manipulations and then form algebraic manipulations is absolutely critical, and kids have to not just sort of know how to do those things, but really master those things.” Ellenberg also shared his opinion on online mathematics education — a format that had many downsides, but some surprising innovations, he said. While the general format led to a lack of student attention, he said, the chat sidebar allowed for more student participation throughout lectures, letting students offer input without interrupting the teacher or the flow of the classroom. Ellenberg looks forward to beginning the new semester, where he will be teaching “Writing and Data,” a seminar in number theory, and a section of a course called “Reading and Research.” “This is a really fun place to teach. The students here are really eager to learn, and it's just always a fun classroom,” Ellenberg said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Shake Shack will open its second Wisconsin location at the Hilldale Shopping Center in 2020. Photo by Courtesy of Aaronr12300 through Creative Commons | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Hilldale welcomes four new businesses opening in old AMC theater Four new businesses are set to open in late 2024 and 2025, replacing the old AMC Theatre 6 at Hilldale Shopping Center. By Marin Rosen November 20, 2024 | 2:00am CST Hilldale Shopping Center will welcome the first of four new businesses to open in the old AMC Theatre space this weekend, Hilldale announced in October. AMC Theatre 6 closed in December 2022, allowing for new businesses to take over the space. That month, the Madison Common Council unanimously approved a proposal to redevelop Hilldale that included repurposing the 40,000-square-foot theater into a two-story retail center. Nearly two years later, retailers Warby Parker, Sephora, Sweetgreen and Jaxen Grey will fill the repurposed space at Hilldale Shopping Center in the coming months. Optometrist Warby Parker is the first of the four businesses to open, with its grand opening set for Nov. 23. They are relocating from their previous spot on 401 State St. Following the city’s approval of the renovation in December 2022, Hilldale general manager Nanci Horn told the Cap Times the shopping center is “thrilled that the Madison Common Council has moved forward with an approval of our expansion plan for Hilldale.” “The property has been a beloved community destination for over 60 years, and our goal has always been to continually enhance its offerings, inclusive of a diverse merchandise mix, restaurant uses and an array of community-focused events,” Horn said. At the grand opening, Warby Parker is giving out a free custom tote bag with any eyewear purchase while supplies last and 15% when shoppers buy two or more pairs of prescription eyeglasses or sunglasses. Jaxen Grey, a Minneapolis based men’s retail store, is set to open in February 2025. The Hilldale location will be the first to open in Wisconsin. Jaxen Grey manager Oliver Swingen told WMTV on Tuesday the city of Madison’s “dynamic range of people” makes it a nice fit for the store. “With the variety of clothes we carry, there is something for everyone, so I think Madison will enjoy having us here, and we will enjoy being here as well,” Swingen said. Sephora and Sweetgreen locations are set to open in 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Wisconsin 'Forward' Statue stands in front of the entrance to the Wisconsin State Capitol. Photo by Drake White-Bergey | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Republican lawmakers to reintroduce bill banning gender-affirming care for minors Wisconsin Republican lawmakers are prepared to reintroduce bills banning gender-affirming care after the U.S. Supreme Court signaled they may uphold a Tennessee anti-trans law. By Anna Kleiber December 5, 2024 | 12:06pm CST Republican lawmakers plan to reintroduce legislation banning gender-affirming care for minors after the U.S Supreme Court signaled the issue should be left to the states to decide. The Supreme Court’s conservative majority hinted Wednesday they may uphold a Tennessee law that prohibits gender-affirming care for minors. Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Brett Kavanaugh suggested the issue should be debated in state legislatures, not the courts. Following the hearing, Rep. Scott Allen, R-Waukesha, told CBS58 he plans to reintroduce his bill that would reduce access to gender transition services including sterilization surgeries, mastectomies, puberty blockers and hormones for minors. Rep. Barbara Dittrich, R-Oconomowoc, defended the bill, adding that she plans to reintroduce her bill to ban transgender youth from playing on women and girls’ sports teams this coming legislative session, according to CBS58. "It's such a permanent decision to make," Dittrich told CBS58. "There are many things we don't allow minors to do that are really serious and I think this is one of them. It's concerning." Previously, Allen, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, and Sen. Duey Stroebel, R-Cedarburg, proposed the same bill in October 2023 titled the “Help Not Harm Act.” In July 2022, Republicans introduced another similar bill that did not reach a public hearing or vote. A total of 14 anti-LGBTQ+ bills were introduced during the 2024 legislative session, all of which failed to pass the Legislature or were vetoed by Gov. Tony Evers. Evers has promised to veto legislation targeting transgender Wisconsinites. This is a developing story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
East High/Wikimedia Commons STATE NEWS Wisconsin public school districts increasingly turn to referendums for funding School districts across Wisconsin have asked for $5.9 billion in funding through referendums this year because of inadequate funding from the state. By Zoey Elwood November 20, 2024 | 2:00am CST This year, a record number of school district referendums appeared on ballots, asking voters to approve an increase in property taxes as state aid continues to fall behind inflation. Out of the 421 Wisconsin school districts, at least 192 posed referendum questions for their residents asking for a total of $5.9 billion for school funding. In total, 241 school referendums were asked throughout the year, 138 occurring in the August primary and Nov. 5 election and 103 during the February primary and April general election. Unofficial election results found that voters from 145 districts approved 169 of these ballot questions, resulting in the approval of a record total of $4.4 billion in new funds for school districts, $3.3 billion of which will come from debt. Wisconsin public schools are faced with declining enrollment because of a drop in birth rates, leading to closures and consolidations as schools try to reduce costs. Since budgets are decided based on student enrollment, a decrease in students results in reduced funding. Wisconsin State Superintendent Jill Underly said taxpayers should not be “disproportionately” asked to fund basic school operations and called for greater state funding for K-12 education during the announcement of her budget proposal Nov. 11. “We need to fix Wisconsin's outdated School Finance system, which is based in part on decade old formulas that were never intended to adequately fund schools,” Underly said. “The deficits which have ensued have caused more and more districts to rely on referendums to make ends meet.” To reduce school referendums on ballots, Underly has requested more than $3 billion in additional funding from Gov. Tony Evers and Republican lawmakers to support the needs of students, staff and schools. Her budget proposal includes raising the state reimbursement rate for special education from its current rate of 32% to 75% in Fiscal Year 2026 and 90% by Fiscal Year 2027. The state currently provides schools with less than one third of the necessary funding needed for these legally mandated services, forcing schools to make cuts in student programming to cover these costs, according to Underly. Her proposal will begin with increasing per-pupil revenue limits by $425 in Fiscal Year 2026 and indexing future revenue limits to inflation. To limit property tax increases, the plan will increase state general aid. These adjustments will cap property tax increases at an average of 1.5% over the biennium. Revenue limits determine how much funding Wisconsin public schools receive from property taxes and state aid as well as how much schools can spend. The proposal will also expand per-pupil categorical aid programs by $100 over the next two fiscal years and will provide a 20% bump for students living in poverty. Additionally, Underly’s plan outlines funding for universal school meals, teacher recruitment and retention, enhancing mental health services and improving literacy resources. Altogether, the total investment to Wisconsin K-12 schools will reach $4 billion over the next two years. “The bottom line is, if we want our communities and our state to move forward, we can and must invest in public education,” said Underly in an announcement. “It really is that simple.” In the past, Republicans have rejected increased state funding for Wisconsin public schools. Evers will introduce the 2025-27 executive budget early next year. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Maile Illanos | The Daily Cardinal News New York is for the rats It’s time New York gets the representation it deserves. By Morgan McCormack October 25, 2024 | 2:00am CDT All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. After famed rat enemy Mayor Eric Adams found himself indicted for bribery last month, we have to begin to wonder: what is New York City’s real problem? Rats have been facing some pretty bad publicity since the bubonic plague, which was actually spread by fleas, and have not really recovered since. They are seen as an issue needed to be solved, but is this hatred due to us forgetting what New York is really about? Isn’t New York supposed to be a symbol of opportunity, a melting pot where any hard working person can forge a new path, find a new life? Bushwick transplants, secret trust fund kids and actors whose only credits are as “Law and Order: SVU” extras — this is not who New York is. Perhaps it’s time to stop electing rat haters and put a real New Yorker in office: a rat! Did you know rats are considered extremely intelligent and expert problem solvers? They also have a long history of employment, being on the ground floor of multiple scientific discoveries. They are adaptable, scrappy, highly social and think similarly to humans. They have the perfect qualities for political office. One may argue that they are even overqualified. Though their shorter life spans may cause serving the current four-year mayoral term difficult, perhaps the higher turnover can help bring new ideas to the table. There are around 3 million rats in New York City, and I say it is time they see some representation. The war on rats needs to come to an end. We should all embrace our furry neighbors hand in paw as we scamper towards a new future. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Morgan McCormackMorgan McCormack is the beet editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Photo by Bailey Krause | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Campus early voting rooms change due to long lines, statewide software error The Madison Clerk’s Office moved early voting at Memorial Union to a larger room because of long wait times and an issue with printing ballot envelopes. By Mary Bosch and Noe Goldhaber October 25, 2024 | 9:05pm CDT The Madison Clerk's Office and the University of Wisconsin-Madison moved early in-person voting to a larger room at Memorial Union after an error in statewide software and high early voter turnout caused lines as long as two hours. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal the Memorial Union voting room moved from a smaller room near the Rathskeller to Tripp Commons on Friday and will move to the Main Lounge during early voting next week. Union South’s voting location temporarily moved to near the art galleries because of homecoming celebrations Friday and will return to the second floor near the theater, Govindarajan said. Because of “higher than expected turnout,” the WisVote server used by clerks across the state lagged and caused an error with printing labels that go on ballot envelopes, according to the Wisconsin Elections Commission. “Normally it takes two seconds to print out these labels that are needed for the ballots for accuracy, and it's just taking a lot longer than that,” Madison Communications Manager Dylan Brogan said. “That's really the primary driver [of long wait times].” Now, state-level clerks are restarting the system every few hours, and it’s running faster, WEC Chair Ann Jacobs said in a statement on Twitter. “Wisconsin is updating us and doing everything they can to alleviate the problem,” Brogan said. “We wish it wasn't happening either.” Govindarajan said he anticipated wait times to be shorter because of the room change at Memorial Union. “I think for future elections, Tripp Commons should be the default area. Voting shouldn't be relegated to the area by the market — the closet. I don't really know what to call that area, but you can substitute closet for whatever it's called,” Govindarajan said. 4,776 in-person absentee ballots were cast Friday across Madison, which Brogan said is the highest number at this point in the election cycle and almost double what is expected at this point in the election. The WEC reported a statewide 40% increase for in-person absentee voting compared to the same period in 2020. Poll workers have been working late hours into the night to register ballots as the system is more efficient at that time, Brogan said. They are working to update records as quickly as possible so voters can ensure their vote was cast. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Despite the delays, record-high early voting reflects students' eagerness to have their voices heard at the ballot box, Govindarajan said. “We were asking if people [on Library Mall] have a plan to vote, and a lot of people are saying they've already voted, they're going to vote right now, or they'll be voting on Election Day,” Govindarajan said. “There's not many people saying they don't have a plan to vote.” Early in-person absentee voting started on Tuesday and will continue until the Sunday before Election Day. Madison residents can vote at any voting location across the city, including Memorial Union, Union South, many Madison libraries or community centers. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 Noe GoldhaberNoe Goldhaber is the college news editor and former copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She is a Statistics and Journalism major and has specialized on a wide range of campus topics including protests, campus labor, student housing, free speech and campus administration. She has done data analysis and visualization for the Cardinal on a number of stories. Follow her on Twitter at @noegoldhaber. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
CITY NEWS Comedian Charlie Berens to visit Madison to mobilize voters “Cripescast” podcast host Charlie Berens will team up with University of Wisconsin-Madison journalism professor Mike Wagner at Comedy on State weeks before the 2024 presidential election to mobilize voters and break down key ballot issues. By Jake Piper October 16, 2024 | 2:00am CDT “Cripescast” podcast host Charlie Berens will team up with University of Wisconsin-Madison journalism professor Mike Wagner in a sold-out event to highlight the importance of voting this November and break down key ballot issues. Berens will host a live episode of “Cripescast,” which focuses on the unique nature of the Midwest, at Comedy on State on Oct. 22. He will be joined by Wagner, who will break down key ballot issues while Berens offers witty Midwestern-based humor. Berens, a comedian, journalist, New York Times bestselling author has been an ever-present figure in Wisconsin pop culture since his rise to popularity in 2017 after launching a YouTube series. Known as the “Manitowoc Minute,” the series is a short comedy sketch playing on classic Midwestern stereotypes such as the love of beer, “Midwestern goodbyes” and thick accents. With Wisconsin positioned as a key swing state in the upcoming presidential election, both sides of the political spectrum have encouraged residents to vote. In 2020, 27% of Wisconsin’s registered voters chose not to vote, according to the Wisconsin Elections Commission, leaving a margin for both major-party candidates to secure the votes needed to win Wisconsin. Berens has advocated for voting as long as he’s been running the Manitowoc Minute. He is an alumnus of UW-Madison and served as the university’s winter commencement speaker in 2022. Wagner has extensive experience covering and researching the political climate, and has worked as a journalist, political author and political campaign manager before becoming a tenured professor at UW-Madison. The event will be presented by Civic Media’s local radio station 92.7 WMDX. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Maile Llanos | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE UW-Madison expert stresses importance of abortion access, urges voter action through research The Collaborative for Reproductive Equity conducts, translates and disseminates research, empowering Wisconsinites to make informed decisions about abortion rights. By Lily Spanbauer October 25, 2024 | 4:00am CDT An Avengers-like team of University of Wisconsin-Madison experts are uniting to research and promote civic engagement on the issue of abortion. “Good policy begins with good evidence,” said Amy Williamson, associate director and co-creator of the Collaborative for Reproductive Equity (CORE). CORE is a research initiative at UW-Madison School Of Medicine and Public Health focused on reproductive health, equity and autonomy. Their experts specialize in gender and women's studies, sociology, medicine, OB-GYN and public health, giving Wisconsinites the tools to make informed decisions. Williamson and other UW-Madison leaders established the initiative in 2018 following a decade of large shifts in reproductive health policy and access in Wisconsin. “We're researchers. We're at a university, so we saw our role, our power and our lane as research,” Williamson told The Daily Cardinal. “How can we use that to help people who don't sit in the university build awareness of issues of policies and impact that they may use for civic engagement, policy, programs and law?” In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, ending the constitutional right to abortion. Following the decision, an 1849 law banning abortion with no exceptions for rape or incest went in to effect in Wisconsin. Clinics stopped offering abortion services in the state until last September, when a Dane County Circuit Court judge ruled the 1849 law applied only to feticide, not consensual abortions. Wisconsin Planned Parenthood (PPWI) has since resumed abortion services in three clinics in Madison, Milwaukee and Sheboygan, and Affiliated Medical Services performs abortion services at its Milwaukee clinic. People working in the field of women’s health care had seen signals the Supreme Court would overturn Roe according to Williamson, so when it eventually happened, CORE felt the obligation and immediacy of conducting research that would illuminate its negative effects. “We went into overdrive,” Williamson said. “We went into high gear to evaluate and understand the impact of the changes on people who need care, on families, on health care providers, on people who care for people who can be pregnant or who are pregnant.” CORE gathered qualitative evidence through patient interviews and focus groups and quantitative data through surveys and analysis of health care utilization datasets needed to answer their questions. The post-Roe landscape has resulted in a host of negative effects on women and other people capable of pregnancy, according to a CORE brief. These include increases in pregnancy-related mortality, immediate and long-lasting effects on mental health, increases in chronic health problems, increases in intimate partner violence and a restricted ability to achieve educational, career and other life aspirations. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email During the 15 months where no clinics in Wisconsin offered abortion services, CORE conducted a study with individuals who were pregnant to examine the financial, health and family related decisions that they made in the absence of access to care. CORE is still analyzing the data from this study, so it hasn’t been published yet, but Williamson said the study’s interviews provided a profound insight into the complexity of accessing health care under the abortion ban. “I feel the importance of sharing that truth can't be underestimated,” Williamson said. “It's no question the most profound insight comes from the experiences of real people.” CORE also translates and disseminates research. Translation is all about making research accessible to different audiences to “meet people where they are,” Williamson said. “We're talking about both using plain language and explaining what is done in accessible terms, but also utilizing different forms, whether it's a short brief, a fact sheet or infographics on social media,” Williamson said. Once the research is accessible in terms of understanding, they shift to dissemination — making it physically accessible for the people who need it most. CORE disseminates through direct outreach to individuals, sharing information to organizations and making it available to legislators. Although CORE’s research topics connect with issues on the ballot, Williamson said CORE stays out of politics to keep their focus squarely on research. But Williamson does encourage people to vote and believes that CORE can be one of many sources of information that voters consult before hitting the polls. “We want to be a trusted source of evidence,” Williamson said. “Our reason for being is that our work helps decision-makers, policymakers and just regular people like you and me make informed decisions, and informed decisions includes people's assessment of the issues that matter.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
University of Wisconsin-Madison graduate student union members of the Teaching Assistants' Association occupied the Wisconsin State Capitol in 2011 to protest of Act 10, a proposal supported by Gov. Scott Walker and Republican lawmakers that would limit collective bargaining rights for public employees. Photo by Daily Cardinal archives | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Dane County judge strikes down more than 60 sections of Act 10 Dane County Circuit Court Judge Jacob Frost ruled over 60 sections of Wisconsin’s 2011 Act 10 law that curb collective bargaining rights for public sector unions are unconstitutional. By Julia Walkowicz December 2, 2024 | 7:19pm CST Dane County Circuit Court Judge Jacob Frost struck down more than 60 sections of Wisconsin’s 2011 Act 10 law that curbed collective bargaining rights for public sector unions in a ruling Monday. Frost’s ruling came after his opinion allowed lawsuits to continue against former Republican Gov. Scott Walker’s restrictions on public sector employee union size and power after denying a motion filed by the Republican-controlled Legislature to dismiss the case. Efforts to overturn the 13-year-old law began in November 2023, when several unions of public employees cited low pay, staffing shortages and poor conditions for work culminating in a “dire situation” in the workplace. The lawsuit argued that Act 10’s distinction between “general” and “public safety” employees violated equal protection guarantees of the Wisconsin Constitution. “Public safety” employees, such as police officers and firefighters, were unaffected by the law. For “general” employees, the bill curbed their collective bargaining rights and placed caps on wage increase negotiations to no more than the rate of inflation. Act 10 gave rise to a dramatic decrease in union membership, leading to less power for public servants in larger negotiations. Frost described the distinction between “general” and “public safety” employees as "irrational.” "I cannot solve Act 10's constitutional problems by striking the definition of 'public safety employee,' leaving the term undefined and leaving the remainder of the law in place," he wrote in Monday's ruling. In Monday’s ruling, Frost determined that several sections of Act 55, a follow-up to Act 10 in 2015, were also no longer enforceable. In a joint statement Monday, plaintiffs in the lawsuit commended Frost’s ruling while also noting it still has to make its way through the court’s system. "Today's decision is personal for me and my coworkers," conservation warden and AFSCME Local 1215 President Ben Gruber said in a statement. "As a conservation warden, having full collective bargaining rights means we will again have a voice on the job to improve our workplace and make sure that Wisconsin is a safe place for everyone. We realize there may still be a fight ahead of us in the courts, but make no mistake, we're ready to keep fighting until we all have a seat at the table again." In a separate statement Monday, the Teaching Assistants’ Association (TAA) celebrated the decision and called on the University of Wisconsin-Madison to voluntarily recognize the union. “The winds of change are blowing in our direction and we urge the university to take note and voluntarily recognize the TAA as the union of graduate workers and be prepared to meet us at the bargaining table,” Daniel Levitin, co-president of the TAA, said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Republican Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, who has staunchly defended the law, criticized Frost’s ruling in a statement Monday as fruitless. “This lawsuit came more than a decade after Act 10 became law and after many courts rejected the same meritless legal challenges. Act 10 has saved Wisconsin taxpayers more than $16 billion. We look forward to presenting our arguments on appeal,” Vos said. Walker called the decision “brazen political activism” on X, saying Frost’s ruling “makes the April 2025 Wisconsin Supreme Court race that much more important.” Senate Minority Leader Sen. Dianne Hesselbein, D-Middleton, applauded Frost’s ruling in a statement Monday. “This is a crucial step to recognize and restore the rights of hard-working public employees doing the people’s work in every corner of Wisconsin,” Hesselbein said. “There are likely further hurdles ahead and I applaud the resolve of those who have kept up the effort to restore the right to collectively bargain in the state.” Editor's note: this article was updated at 8:36 p.m. CDT on Monday, Dec. 2, 2024, to add a statement from the TAA. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin's location at 3706 Orin Road on Madison's east side. Photo by Tyler Katzenberger | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH UW-Madison's female students brace for a Trump presidency as IUD appointments surge nationally Female UW-Madison students brace for a Trump presidency as IUD appointments surge nationally. By Annika Bereny December 5, 2024 | 6:00am CST For many women on campus who voted for Vice President Kamala Harris, the next few days were filled with anxiety, worry and a decision to get an intrauterine device. For Kat Sattel, a sophomore at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, waking up Wednesday morning meant calling her mother to discuss contraceptive options. “I had a phone call with my mom where I discussed how fearful I was,” Sattel said. “And by that afternoon, I had made an appointment with UHS to have a consultation about [getting an IUD].” Demand for IUDs and other forms of birth control increased nearly 22% in the 30 days after President-elect Donald Trump’s 2016 election, a 2019 study found. This election has shown similar, if not elevated, results of the same phenomenon. Searches for “IUD appointment” increased 100% on Nov. 5, and searches for ‘planned parenthood’ jumped 40% in the 24 hours after the election. Sattel cited the potential repeal of the Affordable Care Act by the Trump administration, an Obama administration policy that makes the birth control pill free, as the main reason for her decision. “It is not an easy expense, to have to pay for birth control every three months,” Sattel said. “The reason that I want to get an IUD is because of how long it lasts and that it would be longer than any presidential term.” Sexual health company Winx Health reported a 966% increase in sales of their emergency contraceptive pill in the 60 hours following the election. Planned Parenthood reported appointments for IUDs across the nation increased by 760% in the 24 hours after the election, birth control implants saw a 350% increase and vasectomy appointments increased by 1200%. In Wisconsin, there has long been worry about a ban on emergency contraception, but the elections of Democratic Gov. Tony Evers and liberal-leaning Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Janet Protasiewicz have kept them at bay. In Wisconsin, calls to Planned Parenthood have increased since the election, Analiese Eicher, director of communications for Planned Parenthood Advocates of Wisconsin told The Daily Cardinal. “Our community-facing folks and our health centers are receiving a lot of questions, and there's a lot of uncertainty,” she said. UW-Madison junior Annabel Allen said she decided to get an IUD earlier in the summer because of the uncertainty surrounding who would win the election. “‘I should definitely just get an IUD with the upcoming election,’” Allen said she remembered thinking. “‘Because I don't want to take any chances.’” Over the summer, Allen, a Louisiana native, visited her home of New Orleans and said it made her feel the stakes of the election even more. Louisiana is currently a state with a full abortion ban, except in cases where the mother’s life is in danger or the pregnancy is “medically futile.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Being home and being in Louisiana obviously makes those issues feel a little bit more present,” Allen said. “When Roe v. Wade got overturned, it was like Planned Parenthood disappeared off the face of the earth at home, and I just think about all the women who don't get that reproductive health care anymore, which is really disappointing and scary.” But Allen had her IUD placed incorrectly and experienced severe side effects, such as hormonal mood swings, irregular bleeding and painful cramps for the six months she had it before ultimately removing it. A 2014 UW-Stout study reported 78% of women who had never given birth experienced moderate to severe pain during their IUD placement. Just months ago, in late August, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated their recommendations and now urge health care providers to counsel patients about pain management before the procedure. “You can just feel your body trying to reject it, which is such an odd feeling,” Allen said. “It made me sad, because I was like, ‘Why do I have to do this?’ I'm glad that I have this option, and it was easy and it's accessible, but I just was like, ‘Why do I even have to do this in the first place?’” Dissonance between the severe pain felt from IUDs and the benefits it provides has led to disillusionment in some cases. But birth control has always been a form of reproductive autonomy in the face of what many women see as male apathy to the consequences of unprotected sex. And, with young male voters’ rightward shift this election, more women are getting IUDs as a way to protect themselves and their reproductive rights. “Prior to the election, I was speaking to a lot of guys our age who go to this university, and they were very secretive and almost ashamed of if they were voting for Trump,” Sattel said. “The second that he won the election, they’ve come out of the woodwork saying blatantly misogynistic, blatantly homophobic things. It's really scary to know that they feel like they have that power and feel able to get away with that without any sort of repercussions.” One viral tweet that circulated after the election and has become a phrase used to troll women upset about the results of the election came from neo-Nazi Nick Fuentes reading, “Your body, my choice. Forever.” Allen said, like Sattel, she’s noticed men saying extremely “disrespectful and dehumanizing” statements online since Trump’s election. “Clearly, I've been stuck in this little bubble,” Allen said. “There are lots of people and lots of men out there who have no respect for women or their bodies.” But the election results and the emboldening of the anti-choice cause does not mean hope is lost, Eicher said. PPWI resumed performing abortions in Milwaukee and Madison clinics in late 2023, despite the 1848 ban still being in effect. “We are open and provide this full spectrum of reproductive and sexual health care, including abortion. The Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin doors remain open,” Eicher said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Trump’s proposal to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education would impact Wisconsin students Wisconsin students would face the brunt of the impact if the U.S. Department of Education was abolished, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. By Olivia Ruetten December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST While Republican President-elect Donald Trump has promised to overhaul many parts of the U.S. government, he’s said he wants to eliminate one entirely: the U.S. Department of Education (DOE). Trump vowed to shut down the DOE, echoing calls from the conservative Heritage Foundation’s Project 2025 to terminate the agency, which it calls a “convenient one-stop shop for the woke education cartel.” Throughout his campaign, Trump distanced himself from Project 2025 and has claimed that he had no idea who wrote it — however, recent cabinet picks may suggest otherwise. The DOE has been a point of contention among politicians on both sides of the aisle since its creation in 1979. The conservative push to abolish the DOE comes from the Republican Party’s long-standing belief in smaller-scale government intervention into daily life. Republicans believe that education, like other mainstream issues like abortion and voting rights, should be up to states to decide. In Wisconsin, Republican lawmakers have championed school choice, and have called for education policy to return to state and local governments. On the campaign trail, both Trump and U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde voiced their support for the elimination of the DOE and the localization of public schools. At a campaign visit to Milwaukee in October, Trump singled out the city as the “home of the first and oldest school choice” program and declared education is “the civil rights issue of our age,” according to the New York Post. Roughly 63% of Wisconsin Republicans said they were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with Wisconsin’s public schools, according to an August 2024 Marquette Law School poll. Republicans champion school choice, advocate for the localization of schools Republicans have strongly advocated for school choice, which they define as the right for parents to choose where their child goes to school, public or private, and what their school teaches them. Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson spoke in favor of school choice and advocated for education policy to be handled at a local level during a Moms for Liberty event held at the Republican National Convention in July. “I’m hoping that one result from Moms for Liberty is we start moving away from these massive, large schools, and we start moving more toward the old one-room school,” Johnson said at the event. Former Wisconsin governor Tommy Thompson supported Wisconsin’s first school choice movement of the 1990s, which saw Milwaukee’s private school population increase from 341 students in 1990 to 29,000 students in 2021, according to School Choice Wisconsin, Many conservative families fear public educational institutions are “woke,” meaning schools prioritize teaching children about social injustice and traditionally liberal values over actual educational material. This pushes families toward private or Christian schools that are privately run and funded. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin offers options for parents who do not want to send their child to public school. Private schools service 13.5% of Wisconsin students, while homeschooling options service 2.96%, according to Johns Hopkins School of Education. Additionally, Wisconsin’s private school voucher program services 43% of privately educated students, and this number is expected to grow by 60% once the voucher program’s enrollment cap sunsets in 2026. Trump’s current pick for Secretary of Education is Linda McMahon, wife of former WWE chairman Vince McMahon. She has advocated for school choice and said she will be a “fierce advocate for Parents.” The National Education Association has disavowed McMahon, saying she “has an agenda to privatize public education — much like Betsy DeVos before her.” What is the state’s role in education, and what does the DOE actually do? Wisconsin schools allocate state and local taxes to state and local schools, which are run by a board of elected or appointed officials who decide what is taught within the school district. What information is disseminated in schools is also not typically decided by the federal government. Gov. Tony Evers recently signed a partial veto boosting school funding for the next 400 years. Evers provided the state of Wisconsin with 400 years of ongoing, predictable funding increases which aim to better fund Wisconsin’s public schools. State superintendent Jill Underly hopes to use the extra funding to boost mental health, school nutrition and special education resources. One of the DOE’s responsibilities is distributing federal aid for K-12 schools and key federal student loans and aid for college and university students. For example, the DOE provided $190 billion to schools for emergency relief during the pandemic. Financial aid programs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison benefit 58% of first-year students, and the average financial aid package for first-year students is over $12,000. Without the DOE, the responsibility of financial aid distribution would go to another federal department. Project 2025 suggests sending this responsibility to the Department of Treasury, though officials said moving the Office of Federal Student Aid out of the DOE would create chaos worse than the rollout of the 2024-2025 FAFSA form last fall. Additionally, the DOE regulates programs created under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act that ensure children with disabilities and students ages 3 to 21 from low-income families have equitable access to educational resources. In Wisconsin, 14.1% of students have an Individualized Education Plan, 3% of students have a specific learning disability and 1.1% of students have a 504 plan. Without the DOE, these programs may lose regulation and disabled students’ rights to an equitable education may be violated, according to nonprofit education reporting organization Chalkbeat. People suggesting public schools are “woke” take issue with the DOE’s Office for Civil Rights, which addresses allegations of race, gender and sexuality-based discrimination. It also handles investigations of sexual assault. But guidelines introduced during President Barack Obama’s administration to enhance the handling of assault cases were rolled back by the Trump administration following criticism that the policies were “too harsh.” Political experts said it’s unlikely Trump will follow through on his claims that he would close the DOE. The DOE could be divided and given to other government agencies to take care of, and Title I, the federal government’s main funding stream for K-12 schools, would be given to the states. States would be allowed to use this funding in different ways as they see fit, leading to an uneven distribution of educational material across the country, according to US News. The process to eliminate the agency would take roughly 10 years, according to the New York Times. The resulting extreme funding cuts for public education would be unpopular, with Congress likely to vote against it. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Katie Schiedt | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Missing Wisconsin man faked his death, fled to Europe, investigators say After almost two months of searching, Green Lake County investigators think Watertown man Ryan Borgwardt, who was reported missing in August, fled to Eastern Europe. By Jake Piper November 19, 2024 | 2:00am CST A Wisconsin man who went missing after kayaking and was presumed dead actually faked his death and fled to Eastern Europe, abandoning his wife and three children, investigators said at a Nov. 8 press conference. Ryan Borgwardt of Watertown, about 40 miles northeast of Madison, was reported missing on Aug. 12. Later that day, investigators found a capsized kayak and lifejacket in the middle of Green Lake. A vehicle, fishing rod and wallet belonging to Borgwardt were all left at the park nearby. What followed was an extensive 54 days of investigation involving specialized sonar equipment, a dive team and cadaver dogs. With no luck, the investigation team, led by Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll, widened their search, finding something they “didn’t expect.” A break in the investigation came when officials were informed that Canadian border patrol officers had looked up Borgwardt’s name on Aug. 13, the day after he was reported missing. Borgwardt had reported his passport as missing in May and was issued a new one prior to his disappearance. But when Borgwardt’s wife searched their house, she easily found his old passport, leading Podoll to believe Borgwardt crossed the border with his newly issued second passport. Investigators obtained a laptop belonging to Borgwardt and learned that he had planned to flee to Europe, with evidence such as taking out a life insurance policy, making inquiries about moving funds to foreign bank accounts, airline gift cards and “communication” with a woman in Uzbekistan, Podoll said. "Due to these discoveries of the new evidence, we were sure that Ryan was not in our lake," Podoll said at the Nov. 8 press conference. Now, Podoll said he and his team are “shifting gears,” issuing a plea to both the public and Borgwardt for any information they might have about his disappearance. “Ryan, If you’re hearing this, I plead that you contact us or your family,” Podoll said. “There’s a family that wants their daddy back.” Keith Cormican, founder of Bruce’s Legacy, a volunteer search team that aided in the search for Borgwardt, found the search and subsequent results especially “disheartening,” telling CBS 12 that he had spent about 23 days overall underwater during search rescue efforts. “He definitely cost us a lot of grief, a lot of money, repairs and equipment. I just hope he comes forward sooner rather than later so the family can move on,” Cormican told The Associated Press. At this time, Podoll said he doesn’t know what kinds of charges would be placed against Borgwardt or the cost the search incurred on local taxpayers, but he said the community showed support for the investigation efforts by providing investigators and volunteers food and gift cards. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Badgers fire offensive coordinator Phil Longo Wisconsin football head coach Luke Fickell’s offensive coordinator has been relieved of his duties after less than two full seasons, the team announced Sunday. By Tomer Ronen November 17, 2024 | 5:29pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers have fired offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach Phil Longo, head coach Luke Fickell announced Sunday. The move comes after a loss against No. 1 Oregon during which the Badgers struggled to move the ball against through the air, netting 96 yards and only scoring 13 points. "After continuing to evaluate the program, I decided we are not where we need to be and believe this decision is in the best interest of the team,” Fickell said in a statement Sunday. The team has yet to announce a replacement for Longo, who was hired in 2022 alongside Fickell. Longo’s Air Raid offensive system has underperformed for the Badgers, who have the 97th ranked scoring offense in the NCAA, averaging 23.9 points per game this season. Under Longo, quarterback Braedyn Locke has averaged under 200 yards through the air this season and has thrown only eight touchdowns to nine interceptions in six starts. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Mayor’s office moves to remove, replace Ald. Charles Myadze from committee assignments The Mayor’s office recommended the Common Council vote to remove and replace District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze from committee assignments following a sexual harassment investigation and a move to censure. By Marin Rosen December 4, 2024 | 12:58pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway recommended on Wednesday that District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze be removed and replaced on Common Council committees, according to the City of Madison Legislative Information Center. A sexual harassment investigation found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze broke state law despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them, including District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan introduced a resolution Nov. 20 to censure Myadze with the support of Rhodes-Conway and 14 members of the Common Council. “A majority of council members have sponsored a resolution to censure Myadze for his actions which are unbecoming of an alder,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal Wednesday. “Sexual harassment and workplace initimidation is wrong and cannot be tolerated.” Myadze currently resides on five committees, including the Alcohol License Review Committee, Board of Park Commissioners, Greater Madison Metropolitan Planning Organization, Sister City Collaboration Committee and Water Utility Board. “Everyone deserves to work in an environment free from harassment and abuse,” Govindarajan said. “Removing Ald. Myadze from his committee assignments is necessary to maintain trust in our city’s leadership and hold electeds accountable for their actions.” The replacement will be voted on Dec. 10 and has to be approved by a Common Council majority of 11 votes. Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball wins first conference series against the Buckeyes Wisconsin Badgers softball won their first conference series against the Ohio State Buckeyes at home. By Abby Shulman April 16, 2024 | 4:36pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Ohio State Buckeyes at home on April 12-14, doubling their scores for the first two games before losing the third in an overall series win. First home victory The Badgers started their high-powered 8-4 win with top-of-the-lineup infielder Fiona Girardot drilling the ball to center. Still in the bottom of the first, catcher Emmy Wells took the plate for another solo homer to establish an early 2-0 lead. Starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo’s groove slipped in the third, giving up three runs and Wisconsin’s lead. However, the Badgers’ defense was clean for the rest of the game, including multiple double plays, with shortstop Ava Kuszak fashionably diving into the outfield to prevent another Buckeye hit. The Badgers tied the game 3-3 in the fourth when infielder Ellie Hubbard’s double drove outfielder Brooke Kuffel home, and Wisconsin got back on top soon after in the fifth. The five-run inning’s scoring kicked off with two outs when outfielder Peyton Bannon took the plate, bases loaded. Her single locked in two runners, followed by Kuffel’s launch that drove in three more. The Buckeyes got one more run in but could not compete with the Badgers’ eight runs, five of which were from the three home runs. Securing the series win Wisconsin won 10-5 Saturday, once again doubling Ohio State’s score. Wells hit another bomb in the first, this time a three-run homer to secure a 3-0 lead. Their supremacy increased to 4-0 in the third after a sacrifice fly. Thanks to two Badger throwing errors, the Buckeyes scored two in the fourth and one in the fifth off relief pitcher Shelby Jacobson before Magnanimo took over the close 4-3 game. Just like the day before, the Badgers bounced back in the fifth to make it a six-run inning. Between Kuszak’s two-run smash hit, Bannon’s two-run RBI double, Hubbard’s RBI triple and outfielder Molly Schlosser’s RBI, the Badgers were unstoppable. Despite letting up a two-run home run from the Buckeyes in the seventh, the Badgers still wrapped up the first two games with 20 hits and a total score of 18-9. Defeated in the series finale Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin couldn’t keep up its success in Sunday's game, ultimately losing 9-5 after a series of errors. The Badgers led until the fifth, behind RBIs from Kuffel and Kuszak in the first. Kuszak continued her outburst of a series, hammering the ball for a solo homer in the third in a 3-1 rally. Both teams scored in the fourth, with Bannon representing the Badgers when she raced home after infielder Alivia Bark squeeze bunted. But it was the Buckeyes’ turn to secure the win with a six-run fifth inning that capitalized on errors and singles. The Badgers saw one more run — an RBI from Bannon — that only cut their deficit to 9-5. Now sitting at .395, Wisconsin will take the road to play Minnesota in a doubleheader on Wednesday, April 17th. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Attendees gather around the second floor of the Capitol Rotunda to admire the Christmas tree at the 2024 Holiday Tree Lighting Ceremony on December 5, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks Gov. Tony Evers joined Smokey Bear in leading the Annual Tree Lighting Ceremony at the state Capitol. By Maria Knaack December 6, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wreaths and big red bows adorned the room as Wisconsinites and community members of all ages gathered in the Capitol Rotunda Thursday with Gov. Tony Evers for the annual Holiday Tree Lighting Ceremony, which included special guest Smokey Bear. This year’s theme for the green 30-foot balsam fir is “125 years of Wisconsin’s State Parks” to launch a celebration for the anniversary in 2025. The first state park in Wisconsin, Interstate Park, opened in 1900, and Wisconsin now boasts 50 state parks. Kids, students and families sent in homemade ornaments to decorate the tree, sharing what the state parks mean to them. The ornaments featured Wisconsin’s native animals and plants, natural features and favorite outdoor activities such as kayaking and camping. Wisconsin Department of Tourism Secretary Anne Sayers welcomed the audience and spoke along with Robin Schmidt, a Natural Resources Board member who shared a personal anecdote of visiting state parks with family. “Regardless of age, we all benefit from these experiences that will last a lifetime,” Schmidt said. At the ceremony Evers shared his appreciation for state parks. “As governor, I’ve had the privilege of visiting at least a dozen state parks just in the last few years. I think we can all agree we are fortunate to be surrounded by so much natural beauty every day. Wisconsin is a treasure of natural beauty and wonder,” Evers said. After a countdown, Smokey Bear joined a 7th grader, who shared stories of her experience with and love for Wisconsin’s state parks, to push the button and light up the tree’s LED lights. Wauwatosa East Orchestra played festive holiday music for the second year in a row. Rich Burke and the Burke family in Rhinelander donated this year’s tree, making this the second year in a row that the Capitol’s tree came from the Rhinelander area. The tree was selected for its height and natural shape, never having been trimmed, and was cut down in a ceremony last month. This follows a tradition of selecting a tree from Wisconsin landowners, honoring the state’s heritage of forestry. The tree will be displayed in the Capitol Rotunda through the end of the year for the public to see. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Alex Crawford. ARTS Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour The Internet sensation-turned country star will headline the Majestic Theater Dec. 8. By Bryna Goeking December 3, 2024 | 1:45pm CST It’s been six years since the “Walmart Yodel Kid” stole the internet’s hearts, and now Mason Ramsey has grown up, redefining the limits of oldies and country music in his debut album, “I’ll See You In My Dreams” and his “Falls Into Place” tour. And he has done the impossible — staying relevant beyond his 15 minutes of online fame. This year alone, he released his debut album, a Christmas EP, began his first headline tour and was featured on the soundtrack of “Twisters.” Despite critical acclaim across his projects, it’s a love of music, not fame, that drives his success. His music blends his lifetime love of 1950s and 1960s country music with an Americana essence. After taking a few years off, his sound has grown up with him, carrying a soulful nostalgia beyond his age in songs like “Blue Over You” and “Cowboys Always Come Home.” Days before his stop in Madison at the Majestic Theater on Dec. 8, Mason Ramsey spoke with The Daily Cardinal to reflect on his origins, inspirations and what lies ahead. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. Can you take us back to the Walmart video that went viral? How did it feel to become an internet sensation almost overnight at such a young age? It was definitely something I didn’t expect. I didn't know I was going viral when everything was going on because I wasn't raised on the Internet, so I wasn't able to figure out what was going on until a week later. My cousin got a hold of my grandparents, and she was telling them my video had taken off, and all these crazy things started happening. Like “The Ellen Show,” the “Today” show, “The Tonight Show,” all the places started calling, and they wanted me on. It was a big moment, a pretty crazy moment for me. Honestly, I didn't realize how big it was, but now that I look back, I think that the reason behind it is because my love for music is everything, and I just love doing music. I really didn't think of it as being any different. It was just more opportunities for me to get out there and to sing. Is it difficult to redefine yourself in the public eye after such a viral moment? Do you embrace the “Walmart yodel boy” identity or reject it? The past is something to remember, but, moving on to the future, I have to make sure people know me, the real me, and know my love for music and the artists that really inspired me to make my first album. I would say it was not easy to do at first. It took a little bit of time to transition from the Walmart thing to what I am now. I think everything is going very smoothly. You started as a young performer. How has growing up in the spotlight shaped you personally and professionally? When I first got started in the industry, I didn't really have a lot of songs I felt like fit me very well. I was just trying to figure out my style, and I thought, well, if it's gonna be hard for me to make the kind of music that I want to make, then I probably have to go with this. And during COVID, that turned out not to be the case. Actually, I am able to make and create the music that I want to make, it just took some time. But I feel like now that I have an idea and kind of have a direction of where I want to go for the future, I think I want to stick with it. I’m just super happy [with] how everything’s turned out, and I’m super thankful for my fans and my audience for supporting me throughout the years. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Who are some of your musical influences? I’m very inspired by artists such as Ricky Nelson, Johnny Cash, Roy Orbison and Elvis Presley. I actually picked up on a new inspiration, there's a guy by the name of Gary Stewart. He’s pretty cool; he’s got some cool music I really like. That's the great thing about music, it just keeps growing. You keep expanding your tastes and things you’re interested in. I’m always finding new music, and that’s why I have the influences and taste like I do. I just keep going. Your album features many collaborations with your producer, Dan Ferndandez. How did you two develop such a unique sound? I actually had a call with him before we started writing together and structuring things. But I just kind of talked about my musical influences, and I told them who they were. And I told him my story of being raised on Hank Williams music all throughout my life. I was looking to do the kind of the 50s, 60s, 70s thing throwback. He helped me find my style. I went in with a couple of songs and or future songs I had written down, he helped put the music and stuff to it and that's how “Blue Over You” and all of the other songs off the album came along. This has been a big year for you: turning 18, releasing your debut album, a Christmas EP and headlining your first tour. What has been the highlight, and what are you looking forward to? Man, I’ve had so many highlights this year. Tour, my first album, having a, having a song on the “Twisters” soundtrack, which is really cool. I’ve had so many of them this year, and I’m just really excited to be back out there doing music and stuff. Next year, we’ve already got things in plan, we’re super excited about some of the new material that we're making already in the studio. So it’s gonna be really fun. You joined Lana Del Rey in June for a performance of “Blue Over You.” What is your favorite Lana Del Rey song? I like her song, “Did you know that there’s a tunnel under Ocean Blvd.” I got chills just being on stage singing with her. I don't know how to explain the feeling, other than I got chills in the best way. It was one of those things where you had to be there to really get the full experience. But it felt amazing just being in that environment at Fenway Park. Everything was perfect. Arts editor Rebekah Irby contributed reporting to this article. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
A photo of a Thanksgiving feast. Photo courtesy of Christopher Schmidt/Flickr CAMPUS NEWS Dreading political conversations this holiday season? This Union Committee has you covered As the holiday season commences, the Wisconsin Union Directorate Society and Politics Committee shared some tips to help students get through political conversations with family members. By Wanwa Omot November 22, 2024 | 2:00am CST The Wisconsin Union Directorate Society and Politics Committee (WUDSOPO) held a “Politics Over Pie” workshop at Memorial Union on Tuesday, giving students strategies to navigate political conversations with family members this holiday season. For many, Thanksgiving signifies a time of gratitude and connection. However, it is also one marred by contention, especially as viewpoints spanning the political spectrum converge and clash at the dinner table. WUDSOPO Associate Director of Programming Tess Purin and WUDSOPO President Shahd Abdel-Wahab started the workshop by addressing the increased political polarization and volatility in the United States following the Nov. 5 election. “I think a big thing we’ve learned, especially the past few weeks, is [that] it's a very divided country and world. You will constantly be running into people that you disagree with,” Purin said. Current political climate introduces new challenges Political polarization is a topic Wisconsin knows all too well, with five of the last seven presidential elections decided in the state by less than a point. The heated political environment following the election can make talking with relatives during the holiday season even more impossible due to generational divides and the zeitgeists that form their values. However entrenched your relatives’ views may be, WUDSOPO recommends being confident when speaking your mind while also actively listening to others. Students were shown a clip of U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg talking to undecided voters — “1 Politician vs. 25 Undecided Voters” — as an example of how to converse about politics with those you may disagree with. Buttigieg, a member of the Democratic Party, is well known for going on conservative outlets such as Fox News to share his opinions despite strong disagreement with hosts. Putting it into practice (and perspective) Students had a chance to practice the strategies from the workshop in a light-hearted debate. Topics included the existence of aliens in the universe, if cereal is a soup and waffles versus pancakes. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email As the topics at the dinner table may become more heated, Purin and Abdel-Wahab recommend having a trusted person with whom you can debrief and vent. Through respectful discussion (and pumpkin pie), Purin and Abdel-Wahab made it clear to students that you are not going to change your relatives’ minds. It is in human nature to reject being wrong, Purin said. She expressed her hopes that because students are able to debate lighter topics, they can sit at the dinner table more confident talking about weightier ones. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Thomas Yonash | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges Law enforcement took District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze into custody at 4:15 p.m. Thursday on tentative domestic violence charges, according to the Wisconsin State Journal. By Ella Hanley December 12, 2024 | 6:39pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. Madison police took District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze into custody at 4:15 p.m. Thursday on tentative domestic abuse charges, according to the Wisconsin State Journal. Law enforcement received an individual’s report of allegations of abuse against Myadze and had sufficient probable cause to arrest him Thursday, Madison Police Department spokesperson Stephanie Fryer told the Wisconsin State Journal. The Common Council voted to censure and replace Myadze on his city committees during a meeting Tuesday, A recent investigation found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze broke state law despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them. One of the women was District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett, who said in a statement Nov. 14 that Myadze refused to respect her boundaries on multiple occasions and threatened her. Multiple former partners have accused him of physical assault, including former deputy mayor and mayoral candidate Gloria Reyes. The initial investigation into Myadze conducted Aug. 9 found sufficient evidence of workplace hostility and harassment, but was recently revised after Myadze’s attorney requested the case be reopened. Myadze is not listed among Dane County Jail residents as of 6:30 p.m. Thursday. The Daily Cardinal reached out to MPD for comment. This is a developing story. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Column: Wisconsin football hits rock bottom as 2024 season comes to a close After a stunningly poor finish to the season, the Badgers have to pick up the pieces of a lost season. By Dylan Goldman December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Badger fans might as well put on a v-neck sweater and listen to Guns N’ Roses because the Wisconsin football program has dragged itself back to the 1980s. The Badgers, who had a respectable run of success from the mid-1990s to last year, have reached a nadir not seen in a long time. After a dismal 24-7 drubbing against arch-rival Minnesota on Friday, the Badgers lost everything that made the program proud in one day. All at once, they relinquished the cherished Paul Bunyan’s axe to the Gophers and lost their 22-year bowl streak. The Badgers last missed a bowl game in 2001, marking the last time they finished the season with a losing record. That year was an outlier, however, because then-head coach Barry Alvarez immediately corrected course before handing the program off to Bret Bielema. Bielema led the program to three Rose Bowl appearances between 2010 and 2012. Paul Chryst later led the Badgers to victories in the Cotton and Orange Bowls alongside a Rose Bowl appearance in 2020. While the Badgers didn’t compete for a national championship, they won Big Ten titles and made it to the nation’s premier bowl games during this period. When UW Athletics hired head coach Luke Fickell from Cincinnati in 2022, he was expected to take the program back to the heights it had reached in the last 20 years. Fickell’s first season was a bumpy ride, but ended with a victory at Minnesota and a competitive loss in the ReliaQuest Bowl against a strong LSU team. Ideally, teams are supposed to continue progressing every year a new coach is around. This season started promising as the Badgers started 5-2 and played a competitive game against Penn State. Then, the season quickly went off the rails. Wisconsin lost their third straight game to rival Iowa, this time 42-10 and in embarrassing fashion. A close game against Oregon was hopeful, but the Badgers failed to build off it. The Badgers still had a chance to close the season strong but failed miserably. They got blown out by Nebraska 44-25, giving over the Freedom Trophy to the Cornhuskers in their first loss to Nebraska since 2012. Then came the abysmal showing against Minnesota. The Golden Gophers, who came in with a 6-5 record, ran the Badgers out of Camp Randall in resounding fashion. The game showed that the Badgers have a massive void at the quarterback position, but the team also displayed a shocking level of apathy against a bitter rival. In year two of the Fickell regime, there is nothing to write home about. Wisconsin lost all of its rivalry trophies and gave up the precious streaks the program had been celebrating as a sign of its consistency. The Badgers went a meager 3-6 in Big Ten play, with wins coming against a dismal Purdue team and the others against middling programs in Rutgers and Northwestern. Players like linebacker Leon Lowery and cornerback Amare Snowden have already announced their intentions to enter the transfer portal, and there will surely be more that join them in the coming days. Wisconsin’s schedule was undoubtedly tough, but that does not excuse its performance in 2024. The Florida Gators faced an impossible schedule, but they still finished 7-5 with strong wins against LSU and No. 14 Ole Miss. If Florida could make a bowl game, so could Wisconsin. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email While a lot of games on Wisconsin’s schedule were difficult, the fact that Fickell doesn’t have a marquee win so far is alarming. The Badgers have hosted Ohio State, Alabama, Penn State and Oregon in his tenure. While most of those games were competitive, Wisconsin came up short each time. A quick autopsy of the team will show that in addition to poor quarterback play, the defense regressed well below Wisconsin standards. Gone are the days of TJ Watt and others wreaking havoc. This year's defense ranked No. 12 in the Big Ten and only forced eight turnovers. The Badgers have gone from having reliable quarterback play, a dominant running game and a very strong defense to having nothing. Their identity in the Fickell era is still undefined, and they will have to figure it out quickly if the head coach wants to stick around Madison for long. Phil Longo and his “Air Raid” offense has been dispatched, and depending on the fate of defensive coordinator Mike Tressel, Fickell will get a mulligan at forging his team’s identity. Fickell’s credentials are well understood. He has been successful before, and his accomplishments at Cincinnati prove he can build a program. But this is not the American Athletic Conference. The new Big Ten is daunting. Oregon has run roughshod through the conference in its first year. USC and Washington are strong programs that can get going at any time. The Badgers need to figure out how to compete in the new era of conference realignment and NIL. They must re-establish their identity by finding one that contrasts them with conference powers like Oregon and Ohio State. Considering Indiana went 11-1 this season, Wisconsin clearly can still find its way. But if they can’t, the Badgers risk being reduced to a college football afterthought. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Republicans retain control of Assembly, state Senate in 2024 elections Despite some gains by Democrats in Wisconsin and the loss of an electoral supermajority, Republicans will still control both houses of the Legislature. By Annika Bereny and Gabriella Hartlaub November 6, 2024 | 6:28pm CST Republicans will still control both houses of the state Legislature after the 2024 general election, despite the loss of their electoral supermajority, following an election night that put new legislative maps to the test in Wisconsin. With 99% of votes reporting across Wisconsin, Republicans will hold a 54-45 majority in the state Assembly and a 18-15 majority in the Senate. Notably, Senate Republicans lost their supermajority, with Democrats picking up key wins in the eighth, 14th, 18th, 30th and 32nd Districts. Assembly remains in Republican control Four close races in Wisconsin have been called for Republicans, giving the Wisconsin GOP control of the Legislature once again. In the 85th Assembly District, Incumbent Rep. Patrick Snyder, R-Schofield, was elected to his fifth term in the Legislature, defeating challenger Yee Leng Xiong, a Democrat who would have been the first Hmong lawmaker in Wisconsin history, by 5%. In the past, Wausau has had a 52.6% Republican lean, and the district has been red since 2016 when Snyder was first elected to the Assembly. But the redrawing of legislative maps came after Gov. Tony Evers’ passed a proposal to redraw Wisconsin’s legislative maps on Feb. 19. The previous maps had been declared in a 4-3 decision as unconstitutional by the Wisconsin Supreme Court in late 2023. Snyder had been drawn out of his previous district but rented an apartment in the new 85th District throughout the election and vowed to the media that he would move if victorious. “Despite the best efforts of Governor Evers to gerrymander Rep. Snyder out of a community — by one block — that he has spent decades serving,” Snyder wrote in a press release following his victory. “Pat once again won reelection due to the faith the Wausau community put in him to be their voice in Madison.” In the 92nd Assembly District, which represents the Eau Claire and Chippewa Falls area, Republican Clint Moses has defeated Democratic challenger Joe Plouff by an 8% margin and about 2,000 votes. In the 88th and 94th Districts, however, the [races] were much closer, with just 200 votes separating candidates in each of the races. For the 94th District, which represents La Crosse and previously had a 53.6% Republican lean, Democratic incumbent Steve Doyle is expected to just barely eke out a win against Republican Ryan Huebsch in a rematch between the two after they faced off in 2022. Although the vote count currently stands at 100% reported, the margin of victory is close enough that a candidate may demand a recount. "With the new districting and the redistricting, we knew that this was going to be a tight race," Huebsch said. "Probably one of the tightest in the entire state.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email In the new 88th Assembly District, Republican Benjamin Franklin will also likely beat Democrat Christy Welch by a similar margin to Doyle’s, also opening the door to a potential recount, though Welch has said she will not request one. Franklin is a veteran and small business owner who grew up in Iowa but recently moved to Wisconsin, settling in De Pere which he will now represent in the State Assembly. Both he and Welch are newcomers to politics. The two candidates are still separated by just over 200 votes. Senate Republican majority remains, but Democrats pick up seats in key races Democrats protected their single contested State Senate seat and picked up three others in the 2024 general election. Multiple state Senate races were too close to call for most of the election night into the early morning, leading candidates to declare victory before any major outlets called the races in their favor. Democrat Sarah Keyeski in District 14 declared victory at 12:22 a.m., but the race was not called in her favor by the Associated Press until 1:22 a.m. Democrat Jodi Habush Sinykin declared victory around 3 a.m. with 95% of the vote counted, but the race is still too close to call as of Wednesday afternoon, according to the AP. Habush Sinykin is ahead in the 8th Senate District, which was previously two districts both represented by Republican state senators. Only one of those, Duey Strobel, ran against Habush Sinykin and lost by 2% of votes. According to WisPolitics, the district voted 53% Republican in the 2020 election. Keyeski won the 14th Senate District. She defeated Sen. Joan Ballweg, R-Markesan , who had represented the district since 2020 but was drawn out when the new maps were instated. Ballweg moved back into the new 14th District in order to run for the seat. “It is an honor to welcome Sarah Keyeski to the State Senate. Senate-elect Keyeski ran a successful campaign against a tough incumbent in one of the state’s most competitive districts,” Senate Democratic Leader Dianne Hesselbein said in a statement. In the 30th Senate District, Democrat Jamie Wall won by less than 5,000 votes against Republican candidate Jim Rafter. The 30th District, which includes all of Green Bay and De Pere, combined three Republican incumbents when it was redrawn. None of those candidates decided to run for the new state Senate seat in a new district that voted more than 52% Democratic in the 2020 election. The AP called the 18th Senate District race for Democrat Kristin Alfheim Wednesday afternoon. The district Alfheim now represents is a new district created by the 2022 redistricting efforts. The 18th district runs from Oshkosh to Appleton along Lake Winnebago. Sen. Brad Pfaff was the only state Senate Democrat up for reelection this year with a Republican challenger, but Pfaff managed to hang onto his seat in his redrawn district. Pfaff won with 53% of the vote, while Republican challenger Stacey Klein had 47% of the vote. According to WisPolitics, the district voted 54% Democratic in the 2020 election. Though Democrats had no chance of flipping the state Senate in this election, the pick-up of three seats puts them in a position to possibly gain control of the state Senate when another set of seats comes up for election in 2026. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A landscape photographed at Blackfeet Indian Reservation in Montana, which could be used for solar or wind farms. Courtesy of Haley Rains SCIENCE Native Americans on reservations struggle with economic growth. Green energy could be a solution The potential of green energy on Native American reservations is left unrealized by stringent regulations, hindering growth, according to UW-Madison researchers. By Joseph Panzer October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Native Americans living on reservations continually face a poverty rate nearly double the national average of all races and ongoing business obstacles that hinder economic growth. The U.S. government pushed Native Americans onto reservation land in 1820-50. Indigenous groups were deprived of natural resources like oil and gold that could be used to build capital. A recent study by University of Wisconsin-Madison professors Dominic Parker and Sarah Johnston found that extracting energy from renewable sources like the sun or the wind with little environmental impact could be the force that changes this long standing problem. European settlers pushed Indigenous people onto poor farmland when creating reservations, which tends to be windier, more arid and more suited for modern wind and solar energy, the Nature Energy study said. Green energy accounted for 6% of U.S. GDP growth in 2023 and has employed more people than the fossil fuel industry since 2021, according to an analysis by the International Energy Agency. Still, the road to developing these resources for Native American tribes is fraught with difficulty. To drill oil on Native American land requires 49 permitting steps, and the approval process can take over three years due to intense federal regulations governing tribes. By contrast, developing oil on state land only requires four permitting steps and typically takes three months. And developing a plan for solar or wind power generation on tribal lands requires both a coordination of internal power with the federal government. This poses a particular challenge for tribal companies who, due to federal policies that have divided tribal land into hundreds of parcels, must get approval from each of the parcels’ owners before starting an energy project. “This regulatory jumble makes energy projects almost as uncommon as where they are forbidden, such as in public parks, forests and wildlife refuges,” Parker told UW-Madison. The Inflation Reduction Act allocated $14 billion in subsidies and incentives for developing wind and solar power on tribal lands before 2026, but those incentives are often locked behind the condition that tribes connect to a regional electrical grid. For many tribes, this process is time-consuming and requires legal resources that they do not possess. The U.S. Department of Energy has issued resource guides for Native American communities, emphasizing that they wish to respect tribal sovereignty when issuing resources for energy development on tribal lands. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A shelf of books at College Library on October 19, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Nicholas Duda | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘An affront to individual conscience and curiosity’: Librarian speaks out against book banning’s effects in Wisconsin A Wisconsin librarian told The Daily Cardinal banning books can suppress the voices of marginalized communities and curtail freedom of expression. By Joseph Panzer October 24, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Oshkosh Public Library director Darryl Eschete has dealt with calls for censorship of public libraries for years as a librarian in Louisiana, Iowa and now in Wisconsin. He is wary of the rising challenges to literature and its effect on individual liberty and the right to information. A quarter of Wisconsin school districts have received challenges to a combined total of 1,617 books since 2020, with 667 books being removed or age restricted. “‘Banning’ — forbidding the public from being able to find information or works of expression — is the easy question for me: it’s unacceptable,” Eschete told The Daily Cardinal. “It’s the worst kind of social control and shows a great lack of faith in people being able to discern what kinds of information is worthy of consideration or that they need in their lives.” Calls to ban books have found a foothold in the Wisconsin Legislature through bills such as AB 309, which would have banned the use of school funds for the purchase of “obscene” material, according to a report from PEN America. Book bans violate the First Amendment and make children less likely to become informed voters as adults, according to the ACLU of Wisconsin. Although libraries in Oshkosh have relatively low pressure to remove books, Eschete is on guard about what these bans mean for the accessibility of knowledge in public libraries. “I think the outright banning or removal of any information by governmental forces, however powerless otherwise, (like a library board), is an affront to individual conscience and curiosity,” he said. Eschete also believes challenging books “breeds both paranoia and contempt” of others in a way that is not conducive to good political discourse. “The only contact I’ve had from anyone who wanted to see anything removed or restricted came early last spring from a local policy maker who met with me to express that she thought some of the material we had in the children’s area was inappropriate,” Eschete said. “We met and discussed it openly, and the matter blew over.” The National Women’s Law Center posits that challenges to books with LGBTQ+, feminist or racial themes silences the voices of marginalized communities in literature and sends a message that these identities are not wanted. Books act as tools for children to reflect on their lives, peer into the lives of others and develop empathy, according to the Mirrors, Windows and Sliding Glass Doors metaphor by children’s literature expert Rudine Sims Bishop. Exposure to unfamiliar viewpoints can help develop children into more informed future voters by making them aware of the struggles of others, the ACLU of Wisconsin argued. The American Library Association found that the majority of the most frequently challenged books in 2022 were targeted for LGBTQ+ content and alleged sexually explicit material (“Gender Queer” by Maia Kobabe) with other issues including race relations (Toni Morrison’s “The Bluest Eye) and drug use (Ellen Hopkins’ “Crank”). Eschete views this as censorship that opposes liberty and intellectual progress. Over half of American adults, regardless of party affiliation, oppose book banning in schools in spite of vocal efforts by prominent right-wing politicians and advocacy groups to pull books from shelves, according to a poll conducted by NPR. Book challengers often use information from larger national groups when deciding what books to target, according to Wisconsin Watch. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One leading organization is Moms for Liberty, which the Southern Poverty Law Center classifies as an extremist group. In their 111-page document on what books they challenge, the group singles out allegedly “vulgar” quotes from books found in high schools written predominantly by LGBTQ+ people, people of color and women to argue why they should be pulled from shelves. Despite the current nature of book challenges, Eschete’s ultimate warning to prospective censors is that this can eventually become a double-edged sword. “One tactic I’ve used in my career is explaining — truthfully — to someone upset about a book that no matter what ideological or sociopolitical or religious viewpoint a would-be ‘book banner’ represents, there is a whole other group of ‘banners’ out there who would purge and hide information that that person holds dear and that, if there aren’t people arguing against censorship, it truly is a predictable slippery slope and a downward spiral of challenge and counter-challenge by opposing factions in a divided society,” Eschete said. The ALA recommends those who want to fight censorship in their local community use their voice to speak out against book bans at local library board meetings and on social media and to vote in the upcoming elections at all levels of government for candidates who defend the right to free speech. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by The Daily Cardinal | The Daily Cardinal OPINION UW-Madison protesters need to revive 1960s grit. It’s time to challenge university policy Today’s UW-Madison protests have passion but do not wield the same political influence that once shook campus and sparked national dialogue. Students must harness the generational protest tactics of the past. By Owen Puckett October 24, 2024 | 5:00am CDT Images of students marching in the streets, holding signs and chanting for justice are familiar to the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s campus community, evoking memories of the civil rights movement, Vietnam War protests and anti-apartheid demonstrations. The power in these protests came not only from the sheer volume of student participation, but because they represented a genuine expression of grassroots political activism. Today, while students still make headlines, they don’t seem to hold the same political clout they once did. The question is: why? This phenomenon wasn’t born out of cynicism, but rather from a sense of historical awareness. UW-Madison has been a hotbed for student activism, its campus the site of numerous movements that have shaped the university and the world beyond. In the 1960s and 1970s, Madison was a flashpoint for anti-war protests, with students organizing sit-ins, marches and demonstrations that often brought the university to a standstill. The stakes were high then — lives were on the line. And while the issues today are no less important, there’s a sense that student protests don’t shake the system anymore. The pro-Palestine encampment and surrounding protests were the most recent in a long line of demonstrations at UW-Madison. They were impassioned, they were necessary, but they lacked the political impact anti-war protests had decades ago. In the aftermath, the UW-Madison quickly updated its protest policies, tightening restrictions on how and where students could gather in response to complaints from both faculty and administrators. What had once been a campus that embraced fierce student activism now curbs it, signaling a broader trend of the university diminishing the political power of student protests. To understand why this shift feels so profound, it’s worth revisiting Madison’s history of protest. The university earned its reputation as a center for activism during the height of the Vietnam War. In 1967, an anti-draft protest turned violent when police used tear gas and batons to break up a student sit-in. The demonstration, which became known as the “Dow Chemical Protest” (named for the company recruiting on campus), is still remembered as a turning point in the national anti-war movement. Students were no longer just protesting — they were becoming a political force capable of influencing national policy. Back in the 1960s and 1970s, protests weren’t a one-day event or a peaceful demonstration that tapered off after a few weeks. They were often grueling, all-in efforts. Students would occupy buildings for days, engage in confrontations with police and disrupt the daily flow of campus life until their demands were heard. They weren’t just there to raise awareness — they were there to force a confrontation, to shake the institution until it had no choice but to engage. These tactics were messy and often met with violence, but they had teeth. Students were directly impacted by the decisions made in Washington during the Vietnam War, and their protests were a form of self-preservation as much as political expression due to the draft. Today’s protests, in contrast, often unfold in a more structured, contained way. You’ll see months-long awareness campaigns, scheduled sit-ins and peaceful marches that follow university guidelines. This structure and predictability of modern protests works against their effectiveness. Rather than building up to something unmanageable, protests are now events to be accommodated, their edges softened by the very institutions they aim to challenge. This makes the landscape of protest at UW-Madison nearly unrecognizable. The spring pro-Palestine protests were spirited but lacked the sense of tangible impact. The reason is that UW-Madison protests are now easily managed and contained by the administration. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The university’s response in spring focused on optics and minimized disruption rather than addressing the core concerns of the student body on an emotional and morally urgent issue. In the months following the protest, campus administration announced new guidelines that restricted where and how protests could take place and said the university would maintain “institutional neutrality” on controversial matters — a clear indication the institution is more interested in controlling activism than intellectually engaging with the students as the Wisconsin Idea might suggest. The cause of this change comes from the professionalization of activism. Today, activism has become institutionalized, with nonprofits and advocacy organizations taking the lead on many issues. This professionalization has its benefits — organizations like the ACLU or Sunrise Movement have the resources and connections to push for policy changes at a national level —– but it also means that student protests are often seen as symbolic gestures rather than serious political actions. Moreover, the rise of social media has fundamentally changed the way protests are organized and perceived. In the 1960s, students faced great personal risk to mobilize in person, while today, organizing a protest can be as simple as creating an Instagram account or sharing a hashtag. Though this has undoubtedly democratized activism, it has also diminished its urgency — attention quickly shifts, and the pressure that once built up over a matter of months is diffused in a matter of days. As student protests at UW-Madison and across the country face these challenges, it’s worth asking: what role do they play now? While they may no longer have the political power they once did, they still serve an important purpose as a reminder that students still care deeply about global issues. The willingness of students to show up, to march, to chant and to risk arrest speaks volumes. It tells us that students are still watching, still caring and still fighting, even if their efforts feel ignored by an increasingly indifferent world. Yet, it’s not enough to just show up anymore. These issues students are protesting — climate change, racial injustice, international human rights abuses — are no less critical, but they are also less concentrated. These are battles that require sustained, strategic action, not just one-off displays of passion. UW-Madison protests must do more than revisit the tactics of the past. They must adapt, becoming not just moments of disruption but moments of endurance. The tools of protest have changed, but the spirit behind them must remain. Students need to recognize their historical role as the conscience of society, and rather than bow to the limitations placed on them, they should push even harder, innovate and challenge in ways that the establishment isn’t ready for. These are problems that require long-term solutions and protest, and it’s hard for any short protest to feel like it’s making a dent. It’s time for UW-Madison protests to revamp the lessons of the past, recognizing that every continual step forward brings us closer to the change we demand. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
From left to right: second gentleman Douglas Emhoff; Vice President and Democratic nominee for President Kamala Harris; Minnesota Governor and Democratic nominee for Vice President Tim Walz; and first lady Gwen Walz hold hands and wave to a crowd at the Democratic National Convention on August 23, 2024 in Chicago, Ill. Photo by Finnegan Ricco | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Win or lose, the Democratic Party is taking a turn for the better By focusing on young people, the Harris campaign is making way for progressive policies and fostering a new generation of Democratic voters. By Safa Razvi October 31, 2024 | 2:00am CDT As the next generation begins their journey to the polls, they are reshaping the nation’s view of elections for years to come. This past month, Vice President Kamala Harris’ campaign has made many pit stops in Madison, rallying Dane County’s newest voters and capitalizing on young people’s growing support for the Democratic Party. This isn’t just a temporary strategy. It symbolizes a long-term shift in the Democratic Party’s approach to leadership. As Gen Z becomes more politically aware and active, Democrats see an opportunity for them to establish party loyalty. Harris’s campaign has consistently focused on college campuses. Harris took the stage at Alliant Energy Center in late September, urging all young voters to register and take part in their civic duty. Former President Barack Obama and vice presidential nominee Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz appeared near campus on Oct. 22, encouraging people to vote early. In comparison, Donald Trump's approach has focused on larger rallies and less specificity on a certain demographic such as college students. Instead, he appeals to his existing followers and their views. The best part of the campaign’s rallies in Madison has been the increased civic engagement on campus. Booths line Library Mall, setting up and energizing first-time voters for the polls. These efforts aren’t just for this one election. By registering voters in Wisconsin, they’re encouraging all kinds of political involvement — a necessary foundation to be successful in this swing state long-term. It’s not just about winning votes, it’s about developing long-standing commitments to the party. All of these efforts indicate that Democrats are showing a greater interest in the future of this nation than Republicans. Focusing on party loyalty, they’re prioritizing issues that will be relevant for years to come. This includes health care reform, reproductive rights and LGBTQ+ rights. By supporting the younger generation, the left is developing ties that will harbor them support in the future. These ties aren’t difficult to make — policies important to young voters, such as student debt relief, are already commonly associated with left-leaning platforms. But they have also been a pivotal focus of Harris’s campaign. Her focus will shape young lives by showcasing the Democratic Party’s commitment to advancing social issues that matter most to them. The Democratic Party has also shown a willingness to connect with young students online. This can be seen through its social media presence on platforms like TikTok and Twitter, where students already share polling information and debate the issues. In doing this, Democrats reach a younger demographic and take part in trends that students can relate to. For example, Harris’s TikTok page uses popular sounds and “Day in the Life” videos to connect with her audience. They make political awareness a natural aspect of social media. Harris’s appearance on campus Wednesday is yet another example of how she is taking time to connect with young people. I know many people who intend to attend the rally because they were motivated by the musical acts. With supporting performances by artists such as Gracie Abrams (a member of Gen Z) and others, she’s showing her awareness of and commitment to students' interest through pop culture and music. This isn’t just for short-term gain. Her audience is the future of democracy, and she's showing them their views matter in today’s politics. If candidates share their strategy down the line, they will be successful at fostering a connection with the future of the U.S. Safa is a freshman studying journalism and economics. Do you agree that Harris's campaign is good for the democratic party long term? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
The open world Western game “Red Dead Redemption 2” is one of 2018’s most-anticipated releases. Photo by Image courtesy of VG247 | The Daily Cardinal ARTS New video game releases for Fall 2018 Sequels abound in this semester's lineup of titles By Marty Forbeck September 5, 2018 | 7:00am CDT I feel it’s necessary to preface all this by admitting that, as a man who plays a lot of games, I’m not the type of person to anticipate new releases. Games are just too expensive of a hobby, and getting caught up in hype trains all the time is a quick and reliable way to lose your shirt. If I didn’t write this column, I’d never pick up a game the first day it was out. With the exception of Nintendo and a few particularly smart indie game developers, every company drops the price of their games drastically a few months after release. That said, it’s always fun to keep up with the trades, and even I can admit that the prospect of an upcoming new entry in a beloved series is nothing to scoff at. So, here are some things to keep your eyes on in the coming months. Maybe don’t buy all of them right away, but do keep your eyes on them. Life Is Strange 2 (Sept. 27) The first “Life Is Strange” and its prequel, “Before the Storm” are personal favorites of mine. Are they perfect? No. Are they good? Well, that’s up for debate. They had janky dialogue that was off-putting just as often as it was charming. They had a nasty habit for constantly referencing more interesting and effective pieces of media like “Twin Peaks.” And as much as they wanted to be affecting progressive dramas about young bisexual women finding their place in the world, they frequently strayed into some problematic “bury your gays” and ableist territory that was ... not so affecting. Still, there’s nothing else like them. If there’s any one thing you can say in developer Dontnod’s favor, it’s that you can never quite tell where any of their games are headed — details have been sparse about the new game. Dontnod is looking to launch a sort of “Life Is Strange” universe where each new installment tells a stand-alone serialized mystery. What little has been revealed shows that the game starts with two young boys accidently killing a cop — somehow — and then running away from home. You can’t fault them for originality. Red Dead Redemption 2 (Oct. 26) I’m not a huge fan of the “Red Dead” series. Not for any real reason, I just never really got into it. If you summed up all the time I’ve spent playing “Red Dead” over the years and combined it with all the time I’ve spent watching “Red Dead” cutscenes online and reading “Red Dead” plot synopses, it’d probably total up to a little more than 45 minutes. No, this is here because, good or bad, it is going to be the biggest hit of the fall. Because I’m going to get it, and, chances are, you’re going to get it, too. It’s the first open world title from Rockstar Games to come out since 2013’s “Grand Theft Auto V,” and these games don’t sell like normal games. “GTA V” remains one of the most best-selling, fastest selling and highest grossing media products ever. As of last April, the game had shipped 95 million copies — that’s with an initial sale price of $60 per game. “Red Dead Revolver” came out way back in 2004. The series doesn’t have nearly the history “Grand Theft Auto” does, but that doesn’t seem to have slowed the hype train for this game in the slightest. I could speculate as to why — Rockstar has been marketing this game very aggressively, the industry as a whole is starved for good western-themed games, and “Red Dead Redemption” came to Xbox One’s backwards compatibility program in 2016, introducing the series to a new generation. But the reasons don’t really matter: The effect is the same. Come Oct. 26, there’s gonna be a line out the door of State Street’s GameStop. Spyro Reignited Trilogy (Nov. 13) Spyro the Dragon may be the most resilient and flexible mascot of all time. There seems to be no job the games industry can throw at the little purple dude that he can’t do. Spyro originally comes from the era of PlayStation 1 platformers that were all trying to have their own mascot and launch big new franchises (e.g. “Crash Bandicoot” and “Bubsy”). Developer Insomniac Games invented Spyro to represent the kid-friendly wing of this movement. Spyro games were easier to get into than a lot of the other 3D platformers on the PS1. They had colorful graphics and cute animal characters. They were exploratory. They made kids want PlayStations. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Then Insomniac started selling the rights to Spyro to other developers. Since his initial conception, Spyro has been the star of isometric platformers on mobile platforms, side-scrolling crossovers with Crash Bandicoot, one failed reboot of his original games and a background face in “Skylanders,” an entry in the Toys-to-Life genre. For almost two decades now, fans have been craving anything resembling the original Spyro trilogy, and it suddenly materialized. The developer Toys for Bob appears to be a huge fan of old school platformers. They were behind “Skylanders” and last year’s remaster, “Crash Bandicoot N. Sane Trilogy.” The Spyro games are soon getting a similar treatment, so if you’re a fan of dragons or beauty or joy, maybe give it a look. Hitman 2 (Nov. 13) The whole history of the “Hitman” series is two steps forward, one step back, five steps forward, sixteen steps back — forget it, let’s just go back to where we started. The series has always struggled with finding its identity, but the latest reboot in the series had it almost down pat. “Hitman” is at its best when it's about a silly tall man with a barcode on the back of his head finding ridiculously creative ways to kill bad people. The games don’t have great plots — somehow the silly tall barcode man manages to consistently be a boring and unrelatable character — but they do have hateable villains and fun gameplay loops. There are no other series where you’ll shoot your way through the level once and, just for fun, replay the level later so you can complete it by dressing up as a pool boy and seducing your target. It’s a rare breed of stealth game that’s truly based on disguise and interacting social systems, and very little on actually hiding in the shadows. The last “Hitman” game had two problems. It held your hand a bit too much, essentially telling players the more esoteric solutions without them asking. And its release was butchered, so it didn’t sell. Frankly, it’s surprising a sequel exists at all. Maybe it will have more problems, maybe it will have less, maybe it’ll have the same problems, or maybe it’ll finally be the first Hitman game with no issues and a great story. Either way, it’s something to keep an eye on. Mega Man 11 (Oct. 2) This last one is here because somebody had to mention it. This is a major publisher release, but in terms of marketing, it’s close to being the anti-“Red Dead.” Capcom is putting out a new mainline Mega Man game for the first time since ... Well, since “Red Dead Redemption” came out. Huh. Following the disappointment that was the Kickstarter-backed “Mighty No. 9,” a revival of the Mega Man series, Capcom decided to start making actual Mega Man again. The writing was on the wall: There was a clear demand for the blue bomber, and for the first time they’re using “Mighty No. 9’s” style of 3D retro graphics in a mainline Mega Man game. In the interest of full disclosure, I actually got to play a demo of the new installment’s first boss out at San Diego Comic-Con, and the game plays well. Specifically, it plays like classic Mega Man, and the gameplay mechanics it’s added to change up the very rote Mega Man formula are just brilliant. I still wouldn’t pre-order anything, but if you’re looking for a guaranteed crowd pleaser this October, keep both eyes on this one. Marty Forbeck is the Daily Cardinal's video games columnist. To read more of his work, click here. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Material Intelligence exhibit. Photo courtesy of Center for Design and Material Culture. ARTS UW ‘Material Intelligence’ exhibit threads meaning into matter “Material Intelligence” exhibit in the School of Human Ecology invites individuals to think about how materials shape the spaces around us. By Lillian Mihelich November 21, 2024 | 3:00am CST When you walk into the School of Human Ecology's Ruth Davis Design Gallery from now until March 9, you'll be greeted with materials of all kinds — cascading, thread art installations, glass sculptures, funky chairs and more — each demonstrating how humans shape our world through materials. The “Material Intelligence” exhibit, free to the public, is a culmination of materials that we use as humans, innovators and adaptors that shape our physical surroundings, inspired by the Material Intelligence online publication. This exhibit in particular, explores two materials: glass in a research, educational and museum-style display as well as threads in a more gallery-style manner. “Materials can help us think about an artist's practice and vision, materials can help us think about glass as a research material — the ‘Material Intelligence’ idea can contain all of those, and we wanted to show that both through the work we display and how we display that work,” said Sarah Ann Carter, material intelligence curator and executive director of the Center for Design and Material Culture. On the left side of the exhibit, “Threads: Natural Fibers and Living Lines,” a linen and fiber display, showcases the work of Ann Coddington, fiber artist and professor emeritus from Eastern Illinois University. Coddington devotes a lot of her time to her studio practice, teaching and creating designs that practices up to hundred-of-thousands of years old. “It’s really interesting to be engaging in a practice with such an ancient history in this current, sort of modern, digital age and extend that practice into the future,” Coddington told The Daily Cardinal. Coddington's art presents in dynamic ways, embodying movement and sculptures that emerge from natural fibers. Her portion of the exhibit is more gallery-style, the artwork is spread out between groups of objects so that you can look at her work as their own, individual pieces of art, according to Carter. “Ann Coddington's beautiful, poetic and evocative work in ‘Threads’ helps us think about another kind of material, in this case linen, which can be transformed into the different kinds of sculptures of work in a totally different way,” Carter said. Net-like figures hang from the ceiling, and the threaded designs come in a range of sizes and styles. Some have large gaps in between, like a group of hanging nets, and some are tightly threaded sculptures. Coddington's "Little Arm” sculpture explores her relationship with her daughter and the feeling of being far apart. Paying homage to the title of the exhibit, Coddington has created a piece called "Work in Progress,” which she will continue to work on throughout its duration. "I think it’s nice for the viewer to be able to see the construction of it,” Coddington said. “That technique is called twining; it’s an off-loom weaving process. We usually think of weaving like a loom, and it’s very similar to that except it’s not loom-based.” Coddington will teach this technique at an upcoming workshop. On the right side of the exhibit, glass adorns the “Spheres of Influence” portion, which explores how glassmakers, glass inventions and glassblowers have impacted the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s education and life. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email There's a captivating spread of sculptural invertebrates from the 1800s, fashioned by a German father-and-son duo Leopold and Rudolph Blaschka, who developed the Blaschka models. The sculptures were recreated by professional glass blowers and are on loan from the UW-Madison Zoological Museum. There’s also stones from UW-Madison’s Geology Museum and lantern teaching slides from UW-Madison's Astronomy department. In the back of the exhibit sits a Work in Progress Lab, where viewers can find directions for starting projects like crochet, mending, felting and beyond. "We're thinking hard about how we can slow down visitors experiences in a gallery — creating an experience where people want to come in, look around, maybe learn something, maybe look around, maybe get excited and then be incited to sit down, maybe connect with people and think about objects in the world around us,” Carter said. The “Material Intelligence” exhibit is supported by the Chipstone Foundation, the Anonymous Fund, The UW-Madison School of Education Impact 2030 Helen Burish Fund, the UW-Madison Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research with funding from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and the Marilynn R. Baxter Fund. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison reinstates, alters sex education module after link to adult film award site prompted removal The university removed the SexWise module after an October inquiry from conservative student newspaper The Madison Federalist revealed the module contained a link to an adult film award site. By Jake Piper December 3, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison reinstated a sex education module after removing the module on Oct. 16, 2024 because an inquiry from conservative student newspaper, The Madison Federalist revealed the module contained a link to an adult film award site, the Feminist Porn Awards. University Health Services offers the SexWise Canvas module as one of four violence prevention modules. UW-Madison first-years and transfers are required to complete one of the four modules before enrolling in classes and all other students are encouraged to take one GetWise module each year. UW-Madison spokesperson Kelly Tyrrell told The Daily Cardinal the university conducted their yearly review of the module ahead of schedule after Federalist Editor-in-Chief Benjamin Rothove’s inquiry and reinstated the module with “updates throughout the program in support of clarity, plain language and inclusivity.” “Research shows that comprehensive sex education can prevent people from both causing and experiencing sexual violence. SexWIse aims to provide information that meets students where they are — regardless of their sexuality, gender identity or level of knowledge,” Tyrrell said. Spencer Runde, Promoting Awareness, Victim Empowerment UW member, told the Cardinal most changes to the module were “minor” and questioned the initial removal of the module. “Even though just a small part of my experience was in that module, I still felt like I got silenced by the university,” Runde said. Rory Madden, Sex Out Loud chair, also worried about the module’s absence during the Red Zone, a period of time from September to Thanksgiving during which the majority of sexual assaults on college campuses occur. “I want to go to a school knowing the administration supports me and all my identities and overall taking [GetWise] down was really hurtful to me as a queer person and as a survivor,” Madden said. Runde and Madden were both “frustrated” by the Federalist article. “I think that his article hurt a lot of people,” Madden said. Madden supported some changes to the module, but overall she said “the cons outweigh the pros in this situation.” The changes she disagreed with included removing words from the module’s “sex glossary,” resources surrounding safe intimacy and sex, the university's land acknowledgement from all GetWIse modules, links to a “feminist, ethical porn blog” and rewording mentions of casual sex. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Madden disagreed with Rothove’s characterization of the link as a “pornographic website.” Instead, she argued the link was to “a blog that contained a link to an ethical porn site, which talked about where to find ethical porn.” When asked about their thoughts on the removal of the website, Runde declined to comment. Tyrrell said the university updated references in the module with “research-based evidence and to best align with the program’s goals.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Courtesy of Sue Jennik CITY NEWS Q&A: League of Women Voters president talks state constitutional amendment change, top concerns for women in upcoming election Sue Jennik, president of the League of Women Voters of Dane County, discussed top concerns for women voters and what a proposed state constitutional amendment change could mean for Wisconsin women. By Kayla Northway October 23, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The League of Women Voters is a nonpartisan grassroots organization working to protect and expand voting rights. Dane County’s League of Women Voters is one of 21 leagues in Wisconsin with over 500 members and is headed by president Sue Jennik. Jennik grew up in Milwaukee before moving to New York City, where she worked for 40 years as an attorney representing unions before moving back to Wisconsin. Since July, she’s served as president of Dane County’s League of Women Voters, and prior to that she served as the program director for the League’s educational arm. Jennik told The Daily Cardinal she is passionate about the League because it focuses on voter rights and issues that are important to the public. On the Nov. 5th ballot, a constitutional amendment would forbid city governments from allowing non-citizens to vote in local elections. Jennik sat down with the Cardinal to explain how this amendment could impact Wisconsin residents and what the League of Women Voters is doing to inform voters of this change. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. What does the amendment entail, and why may it have a disproportionate impact on women’s voting rights? The constitutional amendment on the ballot that would change the current constitution, which says “every” citizen may vote to the limitation that “only” a citizen may vote. The concern is that that will lead to requirements that voters now have to produce documentation and proof that they are a citizen. For women, this is especially onerous because women have a birth certificate showing that they were born in this country, and then often they change their names when they get married, or they get divorced and they may get remarried. All of that documentation would have to be provided, and it may be difficult for women to produce all of them. I talked to one woman who said she would never be able to get sufficient documentation because she doesn't have her birth certificate. She has tried repeatedly to get an accurate birth certificate, and for whatever reason hasn't been able to do that, so she wouldn't be able to produce the documentation needed. It wouldn't affect non-citizens because they don't vote anyway. It would affect citizens who are not able to produce sufficient documentation to prove their citizenship. In general, this would be people who are native-born citizens who aren't able to get the documentation that they would need to show that they're entitled to vote, which could be as many as 30,000 citizens who would be denied the right to vote in Wisconsin. What was the process to pass the amendment, and why do you think they decided to pass the amendment now? In order to get a proposed amendment on the ballot, it can only be done by the state Legislature — it can't be done by a citizen petition. Unlike some other states, only the state Legislature can do it, and it has to pass two consecutive sessions of the legislature. Legislative sessions are two years long, so in 2023 they passed a proposed amendment, this one and several others. In 2024 they announced they passed it for the second time, so they announced that it would be on the ballot. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email There's an unfair perception that non-citizens, people who are not citizens, who work here, pay taxes and their kids may go to school, shouldn't be involved at all in our political life, and some localities think that they should have a say on those things. The other fear is that this would unfairly impact people of color, especially those who are perceived to be Hispanic or coming from Mexico or another South American country. It goes along with this idea that somehow immigrants are taking over. There's this anti-immigrant feeling, which, in Wisconsin, is not our tradition. There have always been migrant farm workers working in Wisconsin. Immigrants are needed to work on farms, particularly in the dairy industry where the estimate is that 75% of the workers are immigrants. Many of the people who have those farms or live in areas near those farms don't support the idea that there's a problem with having immigrants because they are an important part of the economy. They're also important in the hospitality, construction and landscaping industries, and with the low employment in Wisconsin, there really is not a danger that people are taking over jobs that others might do. The fact is, we need more workers here. What are the top concerns you’ve heard from women voters in this election, and how will these concerns affect women voters’ turnout in this election? A very big concern, of course, is reproductive rights, including abortion, access to birth control, access to IVF or anything that women need to protect their health care. Basically, women can't get the health care they need to save their lives and protect their health. Women should be able to make their own decisions about their bodies along with their doctor's advice. Another big issue that people don't talk about very much are wages. Wages are higher than they were, but in Wisconsin and federally, the minimum wage is still $7.25. The state could raise it or the federal government could raise it, but they haven't done that. Even though a lot of people get paid more than that, there's no requirement that they get paid more than that, and a lot of people are trying to survive on those minimum wage jobs, and it's very difficult to do. Do you think women in Dane County will be more motivated in this election than prior elections? The issue of reproductive rights is new for a presidential year because we didn't face that in 2020, and I think it motivates a lot of women to pay attention to the election more than they did in the past. In Dane County, there is a lot of interest in this election, and the turnout will be high. We even had the highest turnout in the state in the August election, which was 45%. I think traditionally, in the last several presidential elections, the Dane County turnout has been 80% or higher, so people are definitely motivated to vote. The League of Women Voters of Dane County does voter registration events all over the county. We've had over 100 events since the beginning of September, and a lot of them were at the DMV offices. The DMV offices have voter registration kiosks, and we have volunteers there who assist people and make sure they're registered and get them registered, or update their registration if they’ve moved –– all that kind of stuff. We have registered or helped register 1,300 people in the last couple of months and that's up from prior years, so there definitely is interest in voting. What actions are the League of Women Voters and other organizations around the state taking to raise awareness among women voters about the potential consequences of this amendment and ensuring women’s voices are heard in the face of such challenges? We have flyers about the amendment every time we do an event, every time we do any tabling, which we also do at the farmers’ markets and at community events, and we were also at the Black Women's Wellness Foundation meeting. We're always including information about that amendment at our tabling, and we do a lot of social media about that and other issues. Actually, one of the most popular of our postings is our information about the amendment, because people aren't seeing it very much otherwise. In addition to general tabling, we also have candidates' answers both online and in print, and we're distributing those now. Generally this is for local offices, and we ask them certain questions, and whatever they say, we publish their answers. It's a way to educate voters about who the candidates are and what they stand for. We also held a forum in September on the referenda that are on the ballot for the school board increases that are being sought. We educate people about why it's being proposed and why people think it's important or oppose it. We also work with a lot of different organizations. We're a central part of the voter ID coalition, a group of about at least 10 or 15 organizations, including, most prominently the NAACP. We also do work with people who are working with immigrants who want to become citizens. We've had an immigrant town hall so that when people are either preparing to become citizens or at the event right when they are sworn in as citizens, we have a table there so that they can immediately register to vote. So we work with organizations that do that, like the Literacy Network and Central Hispanic To Go. Does the League of Women Voters of Dane County participate in advocacy work outside of the election? Yes, we do. The league has long taken positions on issues and on the way that's been done. One of the impressive things about the work of the league is that before any position is taken, there's a study by a group of members. Over the years, groups of members would get together and study an issue in detail, and then it would be debated in the organization. It would normally start at the local level and then go to the state, and then it might be moved up to the national organization as well, so there's positions on many, many, many issues. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Wisconsin communities are fed up with government inaction on water contamination When Jeff Lamont attended high school 60 years ago, a local company that produced military-grade firefighting foam would invite science classes to practice extinguishing fires. Now he fights water contamination. By John Ernst October 24, 2024 | 5:00am CDT When Jeff Lamont attended high school in Marinette, Wisconsin 60 years ago, a local company that produced military-grade firefighting foam would invite science classes to practice extinguishing fires, including his. The company would set off accelerants, Lamont and his classmates would extinguish the fires with the foam, and fire hoses would wash away the residue. But it wasn’t just science classes that were practicing these techniques. Companies would test their foam on open ground without containment, leaving leftover foam to seep into the ground, flooding nearby rivers and streams with contaminants. This process continued for decades. The main contaminants in this foam were per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAs), which have been detected in wells all over the state. Known as “forever chemicals,” PFAs are manufactured chemicals that break down very slowly over extended periods of time, commonly found in firefighting foam, other chemical manufacturing and even household items such as nonstick cookware or shampoo, according to the EPA. In 2017, Tyco, which has since been bought by Johnson Controls, first reported to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that they had found PFAs in their private wells. Lamont told The Daily Cardinal the company asked to test him and his neighbors wells in Peshtigo and found unsafe levels of PFAs. The findings led Lamont and a few other community members to form S.O.H2O or Save Our Water, an organization that worked to inform the public about the toxicity of PFAs and pressure the state for groundwater, drinking water and surface water standards. Lamont, who is a retired hydrologist and has investigated water systems throughout his career, dug deeper. While looking at the Tyco reports and DNR investigations, most of which centered around the safety of the accelerants used to start fires, he discovered that Tyco first found PFAs in their wells in 2014 but didn’t alert the DNR for another three years. “They allowed the citizens in this community to drink that contaminated water for three years before they notified the DNR of it,” Lamont said. Save Our Water took the fight to the Wisconsin Capitol, where there are signs of slow progress, Peter Burress, the government affairs manager for Wisconsin Conservation Voters, told the Cardinal. He and his organization have worked closely with Lamont and Save Our Water. After Marinette found PFAs in their wells, more voluntary testing and community pressure led to cases of PFAs springing up all over the state. In August 2022, the DNR proposed new PFAs standards for drinking water, groundwater and surface water, including a 20 parts per trillion restriction on drinking water and groundwater as well as an eight parts per trillion cap on surface water. Only the latter passed with some restrictions, and the voting Natural Resources Board, primarily appointed by former Gov. Scott Walker, agreed on a 70 parts per trillion cap on drinking water. The Board shot down a groundwater restriction entirely. The state has never had standards on PFAs in groundwater, the source of drinking water for two-thirds of Wisconsin residents, according to Burress. “Many of those communities who are first impacted and have been dealing with this issue the longest are still fighting for a groundwater standard,” Burress told the Cardinal. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email A second attempt to pass groundwater standards late last year was halted by the REINS Act, a piece of Walker-era legislation that requires state legislative authorization of administrative rules that carry compliance and implementation costs of $10 million or more over a two-year period. In May 2023, GOP lawmakers in the Legislature’s budget-writing committee set aside $125 million for a fund to sponsor the removal of PFAs. But the money has sat in the fund as lawmakers from both sides of the aisle have been unable to agree on the proper way to release the funds to the DNR. With the funding frozen, citizens continue to suffer. From Burress’s perspective, previously gerrymandered districts that have since been revised by Gov. Tony Evers will be the key to progress. Citizens will be more responsive to their legislators with fairer districts, he said. “We know that safe drinking water is popular. If you talk to any legislator, they'll say, ‘I support a clean environment,’” Burress said. “A near supermajority in this Legislature has been able to completely ignore what folks across the state from both sides of the aisle are demanding.” The federal government is unable to assist with any of the groundwater standards that many organizations hope will be passed, but Burress said the Biden-Harris administration has also been instrumental in the effort. In April, the EPA announced the first-ever national drinking water standard for six types of PFAs, capping the two most common, PFOA and PFOS, at four parts per trillion . The standard will give communities three years to test their water and inform the public, with systems needing to implement solutions to decrease PFAs in their drinking water in the next five years — a “huge step,” Burress said. “These are the first new drinking water standards established by the EPA in 27 years, which is wild, and they got it done,” he said. But back in small communities like Marinette, the wait for funding has dragged on for so long, residents are simply tired of fighting, according to Lamont. “[Residents] just want it to be over,” Lamont said. ”It's unfortunate, but that's kind of the blue collar mentality we have in this community. [We]'ve been fighting for six or seven years and look, it's gotten us nothing.” Still, Lamont, Buress and other advocates persist, hopeful to bring change with the upcoming November elections. Groundwater standards and a counter to the REINS Act to release funding will be on the agenda. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
UW-Madison political science professor Jon Pevehouse said that current politics motivate his lecture material. Photo by Cameron Lane-Flehinger | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Wait a beat before packing up your things in class When you run out of class at the first chance, you undervalue your education. Think again. By Lauren Stoneman October 17, 2024 | 2:00am CDT You’re sitting in class. The professor has been speaking for exactly 48 minutes. She starts to say words like “for next time” or “one final thought,” indicating class is winding down. And then, everyone around you starts to pack up their things. Loudly. The teacher is still talking, but you can’t hear a word. This is an experience that I’m willing to guess every University of Wisconsin-Madison student has gone through. Likely, most of us experience it two or three times a day. You may think this phenomenon is no big deal — certainly not worth writing a whole article about. To that, I say: what is the point of becoming an opinion editor if I can’t occasionally use the platform to air a small grievance? You may think this phenomenon is annoying, but not indicative of any larger issue. Think again. The collective instinct to get up and go as soon as we can and to talk over our teachers tells me that academia isn’t valued the way it once was. Classes have become transactional. Students go because the material will be on the test, because the test is 30% of their grade and because their grade could make or break their GPA. Once they’ve gotten what they needed, they have no issues running to the next thing. We’re all guilty of that kind of thinking. We’ve all gone to office hours to get an A, not to genuinely engage the professor in a conversation. But every once and a while, try to remember that academia is a luxury as well as a burden. It’s not just something you should check off on the way to your career, it’s a fleeting chance to read, to study and to learn things that you won’t later in life. It’s your chance to say, “Hey, I’ve always wanted to know more about Russian literature. Maybe I’ll find the time to take a class.” This mindset is especially important to keep in mind as we hit that point in October where every task, every assignment feels like agony. The professor might not save the most important content for the final moments of class. But she’s earned your full attention either way. Think about how much you’ll be missing this time in 10, 20, 40 years, and sit down just a little bit longer. Maybe ask the professor a question after class. Maybe even do the readings in advance. I get it. Not every class can be your favorite class, not every lecture will inspire your future career. But for some students in the class, it might. For their sake, you can wait another 50 seconds before shutting your laptop. Lauren Stoneman is an Opinion Editor. She is a senior studying history, philosophy and political science. Do you agree that students leave classes too soon? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lauren StonemanLauren Stoneman is an opinions editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Cage The Elephant performs at Bonnaroo in 2017. Photo courtesy of Thornton Drury/Wikimedia Commons ARTS Breaking down the bold vibes of Cage the Elephant’s ‘Neon Pill’ Cage the Elephant’s newest album is another solid release from the band after a five-year hiatus. By Arin Chandra November 26, 2024 | 2:00am CST The American rock band Cage the Elephant has garnered well-deserved praise for breathing new life into the music genre, and this remains true after the release of their 6th album “Neon Pill.” After the release of “Social Cues” in 2019, the band went silent as lead singer Matt Schulz found himself in an internal battle with psychosis and getting arrested for bringing loaded firearms to a hotel. Their latest album is an eclectic mix of melancholia, hope and raw emotional confessions. Each track offers a glimpse into the band’s struggles and triumphs, with Schulz recounting his vulnerabilities, anchoring the album’s narrative. Although it isn’t as catchy or consistent as the band’s previous work, Neon Pill stands as a solid entry in their discography. Opening the album, “HiFi (True Light)” sets a melancholic tone while introducing listeners to the band’s evolving sound. Its steady rhythm and subtle introspection paves the way for the emotional depth that follows. An energetic anthem, "Rainbow" offers an uplifting contrast to the darker moments of the album. Its hopeful lyrics remind listeners of the light that can pierce through life’s shadows, making it one of the album’s standout tracks. It also formally introduces Schulz’s struggles with trying to find happiness within his battle with mental health, again contributing to a bittersweet mood throughout the song. The title track “Neon Pill” is a deeply personal exploration of Schulz’s struggles, including his highly publicized arrest. With high-energy beats and poignant lyrics, it tackles themes of addiction and resilience, delivering a strong message of overcoming adversity and self-complicity. The track serves as a gateway between the introductory melancholic mood of the first part of the album and the more emotionally riveting moments of the second part. “Out Loud,” perhaps the most emotionally raw track, feels like a personal confession from Schulz with lyrics that do not necessarily feel songlike. Slower and more intimate, it explores themes of regret and redemption, standing out as the album’s most moving moment. An addictive earworm, "Good Time" is the album’s most infectious track. Its catchy chorus and upbeat instrumentals offer a welcome reprieve from the heavier themes, representing Schulz’s fleeting moments of happiness. It also captures a bit of the nostalgia behind the heavy instrumentals featured in previous albums, whereas “Neon Pill” prefers to be more intimate with its lyrics. “Silent Picture” blends uplifting instrumentals with lyrics that touch on the pain of being unseen in moments of suffering, described as suffocation. The track also represents the loss of friends and growing out of touch with loved ones due to self-negligence. Its optimistic instrumental and cohesive sound make it a memorable addition to the album. Closing the album, "Over Your Shoulder" offers a moving instrumental backdrop to Schulz’s reflective lyrics. With heavy guitar chords and bass drums, it feels formulaic yet fitting, tying together the themes of loss and acceptance. It also serves as a nostalgic window to the band’s early days of producing music with simple instrumentals but convincing lyrics, giving listeners old and new something to appreciate as the album ends. Generally, “Neon Pill” features symbolic songs that capture Schulz’s struggles with acceptance, addiction and being caged in more ways than one. “Shy Eyes,” “Float Into The Sky” and “Metaverse” all serve to emphasize the bittersweet nature of reality and the ever-growing need for escapism, accompanied by exceptional instrumental and vocal performances. Still, it still suffers from a few albums that are below the band’s average. “Ball and Chain” has weaker messaging because of its focus on its incorporation of an improvised and reckless instrumental. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Same” features a much more repetitive strain that succeeds more in messaging but less so in the compositional department. While these tracks are not bad by any means, they happen to fall short of the highs of the album and of the band as a whole. Overall, “Neon Pill” is a cohesive and deeply personal project, with each track contributing to the emotional mosaic of Cage the Elephant’s journey. It’s a testament to the band’s ability to evolve while staying true to their raw, emotive roots. Although it is not as strong as the band’s other albums in terms of instrumental power and catchiness, the themes of self-struggle and acceptance ring true in their latest work. It marks another addition to their impressive and unique discography and is a solid return to form after a five-year hiatus. Rating: 7/10 - Good Best songs: “Good Time,” “Neon Pill,” “Rainbow,” “Out Loud,” “Silent Picture” Weakest song: “Ball and Chain” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Derrick Van Orden speaks at the Wisconsin World Championship Cheese Contest on March 5, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Wisconsin Republicans sweep battleground U.S. House districts Republicans took the contested 1st, 3rd and 8th Congressional Districts, keeping their 6-2 advantage in the U.S. House of Representatives. By Alaina Walsh and Audrey Lopez-Stane November 6, 2024 | 11:36am CST Republicans seized all three Wisconsin battleground districts in the U.S. House of Representatives. Incumbent U.S. Reps. Bryan Steil and Derrick Van Orden held onto the 1st and 3rd districts, respectively, and Tony Wied won the 8th district, giving the GOP six of the state’s eight districts. Steil defeated Democrat Peter Barca by 10.3%. Steil has represented the southeast region since January 2019, when he defeated Democrat Randy Bryce. Van Orden was reelected in the 3rd district, keeping a once blue seat flipped red in 2022. Van Orden defeated Democratic challenger Rebecca Cooke by 2.8%. Wied won the 8th district by 14.6% over opponent Kristin Lyerly. Wied filled the vacancy after Republican U.S. Rep. Mike Gallagher resigned back in April. “I will not let you down! I’m overwhelmed by the support,” 8th Congressional District U.S. Rep. Tony Wied said in a tweet Tuesday night. Final counts from the state are: 1st Congressional District (R) Bryan Steil 206,218 votes 54.1% Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email (D) Peter Barca 166,787 votes 43.8% 3rd Congressional District (R) Derrick Van Orden 211,696 votes 51.4% (D) Rebecca Cooke 200,556 votes 48.6 % 8th Congressional District (R) Tony Wied 240,519 votes 57.3% (D) Kristin Lyerly 178,903 votes 42.7% Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Darren Lee. ARTS World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit The show featured a lively cast, including University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Izabel Nettey. By Mary Bosch December 5, 2024 | 3:00am CST Capital City Theatre premiered a modern but timeless musical adaptation of the Christmas classic “It’s a Wonderful Life” with music by Artistic Director Andrew Abrams and John Atkins at Mitby Theater from Nov. 22 to Dec. 1. Small modernizations, such as having the traditionally male comedic duo played by women, fleshing out the female characters and taking a less shameful view on suicide, brought the traditional themes to a new audience. “[The audience] sees the movie they love through the lens of where we are today and with more, I think the key word here is acceptance,” Abrams said. “I think everybody today needs more acceptance.” Abrams and I agree — the cast is fantastic. Eddie Egan perfectly embodied leading man George Bailey with a warm timbre and old-timey voice reminiscent of Sinatra. While Abrams said the New York professional carried the show, I think he struggled on some high notes. It was the small town Wisconsinites who stole the show. The dancer with the cleanest lines and sharpest hits had to be University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Izabel Nettey. From Menomonee Falls, Wis., Nettey landed the role of Ruth, George’s sister-in-law, through a connection with the show’s choreographer Michael Staneck, who also choreographs the UW-Madison Wisconsin Singers. The show taught her an important lesson, especially as a young adult. “This musical has reminded me that I am going the right direction no matter where I go,” Nettey said. Photo by Darren Lee. Jessica Minter played Violet with infectious energy and controlled, methodical movements. In George’s alternate universe, she expertly shifted from a naive girl to a woman using her femininity for her own gain. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The angel Clarence, played by Jason Williams, had fantastic physical comedy and an incredible voice. Every lyric he sang went along with a precise choreographed movement. And when George’s wife Mary sang, I swear I could hear her heart calling out for love. The gentle vibrato in Sarah Ellis’ voice held so much emotion. In one of this adaptation’s major changes, the play sought to flesh out female characters’ stories. “Especially in the case of Mary, she's not just like a pretty face,” Nettey said. “She wants something. She wants a family, a life, and it's not just because she's a woman.” One of the most striking aspects of the show was the set — the larger-than-life buildings rolled on and off-stage by the actors brought the audience into the bustling little town of Bedford Falls. “The town is a character in the show,” Abrams said. “Because in the movie, the care and community are so prominent.” Abrams and John Atkins unknowingly wrote the first song for the musical 20 years ago in New York. Fast forward a decade, they decided to write the full show and eventually brought it to Capital City Theater. Atkins wrote the lyrics while Abrams set it to music. Evan Lang assisted Atkins and Abrams by orchestrating and conducting the band on hand. Atkins changed lines throughout the process, and Lang made changes to scores up until days before they opened, according to Abrams. The entire show was a collaborative effort, meaning the actors and musicians had to be on their game. When all was said and done, Abrams couldn’t believe what they created. “We just wrote a couple songs for this play, and look, it's on a stage with all these people in an orchestra and in lighting,” he said. ”You just kind of can't take it in when you write a new show, and all of a sudden it's on stage, and you're like, wait, we finished that, and people are doing it. It's absolutely nuts. I mean, it's crazy, it's amazing.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Badgers squander opportunities, come up short versus conference leaders After a hot start to conference play, the Badgers met their match against Northwestern, losing all three games over the weekend. By Justin Alpert April 17, 2023 | 12:58pm CDT Northwestern (28-9, 13-1) swept the weekend series over Wisconsin (22-14, 7-5) at Goodman Diamond. That said, the Badgers kept each game close and proved they aren’t far behind elite conference opponents like the Wildcats. Wisconsin had rolled through its first nine Big Ten matchups in dominant fashion, going 7-2 against Michigan State, Illinois and Purdue — three of the conference’s worst teams. The Big Ten-leading and 20th-ranked Northwestern Wildcats were sure to offer stiffer competition when they came to Madison for a three-game set this weekend, and that they did. Consistent across the three games was Wisconsin falling behind early. The Badgers, who’ve made a habit of building early leads in 2023, couldn’t get their offense going until the later innings, if ever. Friday | 1-0 L Starter Maddie Schwartz lost the strike zone in the second inning. The trusty veteran hit a batter, walked three and gifted Northwestern what proved to be the game’s only run. Schwartz (L, 8-8) then settled in and completed an impressive, seven-inning start with five strikeouts, four walks and four hits allowed. Wisconsin matched Northwestern’s four-hit total and squandered a few opportunities with runners in scoring position. The most glaring was the sixth inning, when a Kayla Konwent walk and singles by Brooke Kuffel and Ellie Hubbard loaded the bases with nobody out. Anything from a slow roller to a fly ball would’ve tied the game and a base hit likely would’ve given Wisconsin the lead, but Christaana Angelopulos struck out looking. Peyton Bannon then grounded into a double play to end the inning. The Badgers went quietly in a 1-2-3 seventh inning and lost the winnable series opener. Northwestern’s Lauren Boyd and Danielle Williams (W, 10-1) combined to strike out nine Badgers while walking just two. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Saturday | 6-3 L Paytn Monticelli, who allowed three runs in four innings of Wednesday’s doubleheader versus St. Thomas, started Saturday’s first game. Like Schwartz, the freshman’s control issues gave Northwestern an early lead — two walks and a hit-by-pitch put the Wildcats up 1-0 in the second inning. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Unlike Schwartz, however, Monticelli (L, 5-2) was unable to settle in and exited in the third inning after allowing a pair of two-out hits and a second run. The Badgers finally scored in the bottom of the third as Katie Keller turned on an inside pitch and launched a no-doubter to right field. Tessa Magnanimo struggled in relief, allowing a solo home run in the fifth and three more runs in the sixth. Keller homered again in the seventh to cut Wisconsin’s deficit to 6-3. A Konwent walk and Kuffel single brought the tying run to the plate with nobody out, but the middle of the order couldn’t keep the rally going. Three runs — all thanks to Keller — was an underwhelming total considering Wildcat starter Cami Henry’s lack of control. Henry (W, 10-1) walked five batters and hit one in six-plus innings. Wisconsin made seven fly-ball outs versus Henry, though, consistently failing to advance runners and capitalize on the free passes. Saturday | 4-3 L Northwestern opened the scoring once again with three unearned fourth-inning runs off Schwartz. Second baseman Rylie Crane’s error opened the door for Northwestern’s rally. The freshman Crane has impressed with a .274 average, but her defense has proven costly on various occasions. The Badgers responded with one run on Ellie Hubbard’s RBI single in the bottom of the fourth. It likely would’ve scored two had pinch-runner Bree Mitchell held up at third on the previous play. Mitchell had been thrown out trying to score from first on a wall-ball double by Keller. Wisconsin still trailed 3-1 with two outs in the seventh when pinch-hitter Emily Bojan floated a bloop single to right. Molly Schlosser followed with a game-tying blast to center field — excellent timing for the sophomore’s first career home run. The series finale was Schwartz’s game to win or lose, and she finally faltered in the top of the ninth. Shortstop Maeve Nelson drew a leadoff walk and came around to score on a sacrifice fly, giving the Wildcats a 4-3 lead. Down to their final out once again, the Badgers threatened again with an Ava Kuszak double. Northwestern intentionally walked Konwent, opting to instead face the red-hot Keller. Williams (W, 11-1) struck Keller out to secure the weekend sweep. Schwartz (L, 8-9) got unlucky in her nine-inning, 124-pitch effort. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. A step behind To be considered among the Big Ten’s best, Wisconsin must find ways to advance runners and manufacture runs in close games like these. The Badgers’ unremarkable speed is one factor and isn’t an easy midseason fix. Wisconsin ranks 10th in the conference with 29 stolen bases. Their 65% success rate ranks last, though, so running more often may not be a solution. Despite the three losses, there were a lot of positives about Wisconsin’s performance this weekend. The Badgers actually outhit Northwestern 20-19 and drew 12 walks to the Wildcats’ nine — this suggests both Wisconsin’s pitchers and hitters can compete with the Big Ten leaders. Keller clearly wasn’t fazed by Northwestern’s formidable pitching staff in her two-homer Saturday performance. In fact, the first baseman has been a tough out for all opponents lately. Over her last 10 games, Keller has hit .467 with three doubles, four home runs, five walks and nine RBI while striking out just four times. Keller now boasts a 1.054 OPS and will be an essential piece of Wisconsin’s postseason push. Schlosser appears to be heating up as well, going 7-for-15 with four RBI over the last five games. Typically hitting ninth in the order, Schlosser is setting up Keller, Konwent and Kuffel for more RBI opportunities while putting up runs on her own, as seen with the game-tying home run Saturday. Wisconsin, now fifth in the Big Ten standings, will look to get back in the win column with a Wednesday doubleheader versus ninth-place Minnesota (25-16, 6-6) at Goodman Diamond. The Badgers will then hit the road for consecutive weekend series at Nebraska (30-13, 10-4) and Maryland (29-13, 6-8). Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin wins Greenbrier Tip-Off, continues incredible start to the season With wins over UCF and Pitt, Wisconsin improves to 7-0 for the first time since the 2014-15 season. By Jacob Szczap November 27, 2024 | 5:06pm CST With two impressive victories over the University of Central Florida and the University of Pittsburgh last weekend, the Wisconsin men’s basketball team won the Greenbrier Tip-Off Tournament, starting their season 7-0, and continued to make a name for themselves in college basketball’s opening month. Entering the season with an unproven, new-look team, No. 15 Wisconsin was picked by national pundits to finish toward the end of the Big Ten. But as their torrid start to the season continues, Wisconsin's performance over the weekend in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia is their latest showing that proves they are a team that cannot be ignored. The Badgers beat UCF 86-70 on Friday and then defeated Pittsburgh 81-75 on Sunday to clinch the tournament championship. With their victory over Pittsburgh, Wisconsin is now the only team in the country with multiple wins over teams ranked in the KenPom Top 25. Led by guards John Tonje and John Blackwell, Wisconsin’s offense has continued to put impressive numbers on the board. Over the weekend, Tonje added to his incredible start to his Wisconsin career, taking home Tournament MVP honors after scoring 33 points and grabbing seven rebounds Sunday. Tonje scored 15 points along with six rebounds against UCF on Friday. With his performance Sunday, Tonje became the first player in the Big Ten this season to record multiple 30-point games. Tonje has reached double figures in every game this season for Wisconsin and has reached 15 points in all but one. He is now averaging 21.3 points per game, third in the Big Ten. Tonje delivered a heartfelt message after the game in an interview. “I just want my teammates to know that I’m here to build lifelong relationships, and I think they’ve embraced me and the city’s embraced me,” he said. “I’m just doing everything I can to compete for the name on the front of the jersey, and it’s been amazing so far.” Blackwell continued his hot start to his sophomore season, averaging 15.5 points, four rebounds and a steal over the weekend, earning All-Tournament Team honors. Forward Nolan Winter and guard Kamari McGee also had memorable weekends for the Badgers. Winter followed up a 13-point and 10-rebound double-double on Friday with an 11-point performance on Sunday, marking the first time in his career he has put up double figures consecutively. Meanwhile, with 14 points on Friday and 10 on Sunday, McGee posted his first back-to-back double-digit scoring games with Wisconsin. McGee played previously at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. McGee, now in his senior season, has emerged as an invaluable part of Wisconsin’s team. In the 23 games in which McGee has played at least 10 minutes, the Badgers are 20-3 and 16-0 dating back to last season. Head coach Greg Gard has emphasized the importance of offense in today’s era of college basketball, and seven games in, he has received contributions down his roster. Wisconsin’s victories over the weekend emphasized its ability to score and that they must be taken seriously as the Big Ten season approaches. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball opens spring season in Phoenix with a split double-header Following a resounding win against Weber State University in their opening game, the Badgers even out their season record to 1-1. By Abby Shulman February 14, 2024 | 1:32pm CST The Badgers played their first official game of the season in Phoenix, shutting out Weber State 8-0 in the Arizona Kajikawa Classic after their opening game in Tempe, Arizona was canceled. The Badgers started fast in their first-ever game against Weber State, taking a 1-0 lead after the first inning. Their hot start continued into the second with two more runs thanks to outfielder Molly Schlosser’s double to left field. The Badgers’ fielding supported their offense, allowing no errors and zero runners to cross home. Their offense continued to produce with three more runs in the fourth inning, then adding two more insurance runs in the fifth and final inning off hits from catchers Emmy Wells and Emily Bojan. With 11 total hits and no errors, the Badgers could not have started the season any better. Wisconsin continued their opening in Phoenix against Grand Canyon University, another school they had never played before, at GCU’s stadium before losing 5-2. The Badgers quickly fell behind in the first inning by a single run from GCU. However, Wisconsin took the lead 2-1 after outfielder Brooke Kuffel launched a homerun over the left field fence, making this the junior’s eighth homer of her career. GCU got ahead 5-2, but were then shut down after pitcher Tessa Magnanimo took over the mound from Shelby Jacobson in the fourth inning. The Badgers continued the Kajikawa Classic in Tempe on Feb. 10. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Pro-Palestine protesters call for divestment outside of a Board of Regents meeting at Gordon Dining and Event Center at 8:00 a.m. on December 5, 2024. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS 19 arrested after pro-Palestine protesters interrupt Board of Regents meeting The University of Wisconsin-Madison Police Department arrested and detained 19 protesters at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. All were released without citations at this time. By Annika Bereny and Mary Bosch December 5, 2024 | 3:58pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison Police Department arrested 19 people at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. Thursday after 50 pro-Palestine protesters disrupted a Board of Regents meeting, demanding the university to financially and socially divest from Israel. Footage posted by Students for a Democratic Society Madison shows officers attempting to escort the group of protesters out of Gordon's. The protesters chanted “We won’t leave” as an officer said, “It’s time to go.” In the background, other members were being handcuffed and led out of another door as the larger group continued chanting “Free Palestine.” UWPD detained the 19 protesters in Gordon Commons for a short period, prompting social media posts from UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine and other groups urging people to call UWPD and ask for the release of those detained. All were released without citations at this time. A Daily Cardinal reporter saw seven or eight police cars in the parking lot outside Sellery Residence Hall at 9 a.m. After the disruption, police officers prevented the public and even some UW officials from accessing the Regents meeting, despite it continuing inside. A UW-Madison police officer said the situation represented a “safety issue” and that they could watch the livestream. A Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reporter reminded police the meeting is open to the public under state law and there didn't appear to be a sufficient safety issue for the meeting to be halted. The reporter was later let inside. About 15 of those protesting were students from UW-Milwaukee, where a dozen UWM protesters held a one-minute disruption at a Board of Regents meeting last spring. “It's been a year of this genocide — more and more people die every day that we don't take action," said Audari Tamayo, an arrested UW-Milwaukee protester. “And for that, they punished us.” UWPD said “each [of today’s] cases will be investigated, and citations could be issued in the future,” in a press release Thursday. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison Starbucks workers strike in nationwide protest for better pay, working conditions Employees at the Starbucks located on Capitol Square say the company has refused to negotiate with the union. By Francesca Pica March 22, 2023 | 5:00pm CDT Employees of the Starbucks located on Capitol Square went on strike Wednesday as part of a nationwide protest to push for better pay and working conditions. Workers picketed outside the Starbucks on 1 East Main St. after they claimed representatives from the company refused to negotiate with employees for better compensation. Lee Marfyak, a shift supervisor of five years, told The Daily Cardinal workers’ demand jobs that afford them a level of stability and the ability to support themselves without needing additional sources of income. “We want a good workplace. We don’t want to tear down Starbucks. We don’t want to drive them out of business,” Marfyak said. “We just want to be able to make enough to make our ends meet and have a decent work life where we’re not stressed and doing six jobs at once.” The company punished Starbucks locations that chose to unionize, such as the Capitol Square location, according to Marfyak. For example, Starbucks implemented credit card tipping only at non-unionized locations, leaving unionized employees without an additional source of income. Marfyak said credit card tipping would provide a much-needed boost in pay for employees without harming Starbucks’ profits. “It would cost Starbucks no money,” Marfyak said. “It’s literally just a software update they could roll out, and it would increase our wages by like 10 to 15%. It would be substantial, especially when we’re all barely or not making a living wage and can’t really survive.” According to a survey from Pew Research Center, 41% of Americans don’t pay any of their typical weekly expenses with cash. Only 14% use cash for all or most of their expenses. Another employee, James, who asked to remain anonymous, said wages are not sufficient for employees to have financial security. “My pay pretty much covers rent and food, and maybe I can buy new pants or something like that,” James said. “If anything major happens [like] an emergency, that’s always scary.” Senua O’Connor, a barista at the Capitol Square location, said Starbucks has also implemented new services such as DoorDash delivery without scheduling additional staff, leaving employees feeling overwhelmed with the added responsibilities. “I think the understaffing is getting to be really tangible,” O’Connor said. “Pretty consistently, we’re noticing those days where we’re just understaffed, and Starbucks is just flooding us.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Along with low labor hours, people lose hours they expect to work per week,” said Joanna Weir, a part-time Starbuck employee. “Often stores don’t have the coverage they need because of labor hours set by corporate, who don’t have the insight on what coverage a store needs.” Employees have attempted to negotiate with Starbucks for raises and improved working conditions, according to Marfyak, but the company has refused to listen to their demands. “So far, we’ve had one negotiation session a few months ago, where they walked out of the room after probably less than 10 minutes,” Marfyak said. The strike at the Madison Starbucks coincided with protests from workers in more than 100 locations across the country, including Starbucks locations in Minnesota, Colorado and New Jersey, in what organizers called a “National Day of Action.” Workers and labor advocates criticized Starbucks for allegedly undermining unions throughout the country, including firing workers for union activity. The Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, headed by chairman Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT), called former interim CEO Howard Shultz to testify before the committee on March 29 about the company’s labor practices. Weir said the Senate testimony could serve as an opportunity to hold Starbucks accountable for its treatment of workers. “Union busting tactics take a lot away from employees,” Weir said. “With the Democrats’ support for unions we’re hoping to see laws pass that make unionizing easier. I’m hoping Bernie [Sanders] and the committee see the evidence.” Schultz stepped down as interim CEO of the company Monday, days before he was scheduled to testify. James said good working conditions are a prerequisite for Starbucks to maintain successful locations. “If they want good employees that are always going to do a good job and provide great customer service, they should make it a type of job that is sustainable,” James said. Ultimately, O’Connor said the workers are fighting for the ability to make a stable, livable wage. “The thing that we want in the end is just to be able to work here and have it be a job that you could potentially stay at for your whole life,” O’Connor said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Francesca PicaFrancesca Pica is the editor-in-chief for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the city news editor. She has covered multiple municipal elections, state politics and is a leading reporter on Madison labor issues. She served as an intern for The Capital Times, currently serves as a WisPolitics intern and will also intern with the Wisconsin State Journal this summer. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Aimon Van Houten | The Daily Cardinal SPORTS Wisconsin hosts NCAA Cross Country Championships in thrilling end to season The Wisconsin men’s cross country team outperformed expectations in a star-studded field, while the women’s team fell short. By Aimon Van Houten November 26, 2024 | 1:46pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison cross country team were back on their home course for the fourth and final time of the season, hosting the NCAA Cross Country Championships for the first time since 2018 when Badgers’ alumni Morgan McDonald took home the individual title. Though race conditions were far from perfect — soft ground and a slight wind exacerbated the chilly morning air — the extremely talented fields from both the men’s and women’s races assured that fast times were in order. The women’s 6k race went first, and the Badgers women placed 22nd out of 31 teams for the second year in a row. Despite being ranked 14th in the nation, the women were buried early in the race with their frontrunner all the way back in 99th place through the halfway point. Though they still could have salvaged the race, the women failed to move up when they needed to. Senior Lindsay Cunningham was the first to cross the line for the Badgers, placing 111th with a time of 20:36.6. Sophomore Annika Cutforth (20:46.4), senior Shae Ruhly (20:47.2), sophomore Bella Jacobsen (20:48.0), senior Carolyn Shult (20:51.8) and freshman Nora Gremban (20:52.7) finished soon after. None of the Badgers improved from their times at Pre-Nationals just one month ago. Sophomore Doris Lemngole from Alabama won the race as an individual with a time of 19:21.0, beating out New Mexico freshman Pamela Kosgei, owner of the current course record with her win at Pre Nationals in October. No. 1 Brigham Young University won the team title by 17 points over No. 4 West Virginia. The Badger men’s 10k race started off in the same fashion as the women’s. The men were all the way back in 27th place through the 1k of the race, with their frontrunner in 123rd. But this was their worst positioning in the race, as each scorer climbed over 100 places before the last kilometer. Graduate student Bob Liking had an excellent race to end his career as a Badger, climbing over 150 places by the end of the race to finish 16th in the nation (29:09.2). He was just one second off breaking the previous course record (29:08.3), which was taken down by 14 separate runners. Behind Liking, the Badgers had a powerful pack of four runners split by just 10 seconds. Though starting off conservatively, they each moved up 1k throughout the race, eventually dropping Wisconsin’s team score from 27th to fourth. Senior Adam Spencer (29:30.1) led the way for the pack, with sophomore Micah Wilson (29:34.4), freshman Matan Ivri (29:36.2) and freshman Christian de Vaal (29:40.5) not far behind. The No. 7 Badgers exceeded their expectations by placing fourth overall, upsetting powerhouses like No. 2 Oklahoma State and No. 5 New Mexico along the way. Harvard senior and 2024 Olympian Graham Blanks completed his repeat title after winning individually in last year’s meet. Blanks came through with a time of 28:37.2, beating the previous course record by a jaw-dropping 31.1 seconds. No. 1 ranked Brigham Young University also won the men's team title with a score of 124. This marked the first time a university won both team titles since Colorado pulled it off in 2002. The Badger’s impressive fourth-place finish was a big improvement from the previous year’s 10th. In front of a hometown crowd at Thomas Zimmer, the men finished off a very satisfying season with a huge victory. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Courtesy of Sarah Sapp/Flickr SCIENCE Though threat is low, agencies monitor bird flu in Wisconsin as cases rise nationally As of Monday, 21 Wisconsin counties, including southern Barron, Bayfield, Columbia, Rock, Sauk and Jefferson counties, have reported cases of bird flu, affecting a total of around 3.6 million birds since March 2022. By Nicole Steele December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST A highly contagious virus known as Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, or the bird flu, has spread among poultry flocks and affected around 112 million birds since February 2022. Though the bird flu primarily affects poultry, it has been spreading throughout the dairy cattle industry. Common symptoms for poultry include sudden death with no apparent illness, lack of energy or appetite, decrease in egg production, stumbling or diarrhea — however, poultry flocks can also be asymptomatic. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) monitors the amount of commercial and noncommercial bird operations that have been exposed to the bird flu. As of Monday, 21 Wisconsin counties, including southern Columbia, Rock, Sauk and Jefferson counties, have reported cases of bird flu, affecting a total of around 3.6 million birds since March 2022. Among those affected are 17 commercial flocks and 19 backyard flocks in Wisconsin, according to the USDA. All commercial operations were or are being quarantined. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) monitors bird flu in wild bird and waterfowl populations. In some cases, wild birds and waterfowl carry the illness within their gastrointestinal tract without showing signs of sickness, while rare strains can cause severe disease. Symptoms for wild birds and waterfowl include sneezing, coughing, nasal discharge, falling, tremors, circling, abnormal head positions, diarrhea or green colored feces. The risk of humans contracting the virus without animal contact is quite low, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. People exposed to infected or potentially infected animals, or in environments with possible virus exposure, are at higher risk for contracting the bird flu. The current risk of contracting the bird flu for the general public is low, and no human cases have currently been reported in Wisconsin. The first case of avian influenza in dairy cattle in the United States was in March of 2024, and now 15 states and 695 dairy herds have been affected. The first human infection transmitted from a dairy cow in the United States was in April of 2024. There have been 57 total cases of human infection since April, with 34 of those cases being from cattle alone. Human symptoms can range from mild eye infections and upper respiratory symptoms to more severe pneumonia and death. Humans can contract the virus through the nose, eyes or mouth by contact or breathing of air droplets, infected feces, saliva, mucous or touching areas with virus droplets and then touching themselves. The bird flu can also spread to other mammals outside the dairy cattle industry including red foxes, otters, minks and bobcats. These mammals are at risk for ingesting the illness because they scavenge or hunt for birds. The best way to prevent the spread of bird flu is through biosecurity measures, such as reducing visitors, washing hands frequently, wearing disposable boot covers or foot baths, changing clothes before and after exiting flocks and cleaning tools. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Students prepare for "Pride and Prejudice," running through Nov. 17. Courtesy of University Theatre. ARTS UW-Madison ‘Pride and Prejudice’ breathes new life, feminism into an Austen classic “Pride and Prejudice” is showing at the Ronald E. Mitchell Theatre through Nov. 17. By Britta Sevcik November 14, 2024 | 4:00am CST It can be difficult to rework a 200-year-old novel for university students. But director and co-adaptor Ann M. Shanahan and co-adaptor and costume designer Aly Amidei’s adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice” brought a new lens to the play, enrapturing the audience in this romantic classic. In an interview with The Daily Cardinal, Shanahan said she appreciates all of the novel’s past adaptations, but “none of them felt like they spoke to what resonates with me about the novel.” For Amidei, this meant a deeper focus “on the unapologetic nature of the women characters,” particularly showcasing how “they stand with both feet on the ground, and they stand in their truth, and they voice their truth in a way that is startling for me, even 200 years later,” she said. All of the actresses, supporting and leading, take on the role of narrator at some point. Passing around the role of narration kept the audience on its toes, replicating the role gossip plays in past and present society. The strength of the play’s female characters was on full display. Although our world looks very different from Austen’s, certain themes still remain relevant today. “Even though it's dealing in a lot of weddings and couplings, it's the voice, the strong voices that make it feel like you can relate to it,” Shanahan said. This was especially communicated by AJ Stoffel’s portrayal of Elizabeth Bennet. Between her convincing recitation of Jane Austen’s hefty dialogue paired with her use of physical comedy and facial expressions, she perfectly portrayed a headstrong Elizabeth Bennet. But no actresses portrayed comedy quite like Amelia Echmeier’s Caroline Bingley and Nora Wondra’s Mrs. Bennet. These ladies delivered lines that had me doubled over in laughter throughout the play. Both co-adaptors felt this play held a strong relevance today. “Pride and Prejudice” continues to still garner popularity in every generation. The cast themselves proved this throughout the production. “There's one person we cast who was named Eliza for Eliza Bennett,” Shanahan said. “[We] had another person who auditioned whose parent's first date had been going to see a movie version of the play.” The costuming of this production posed the unique challenge of capturing the essence of the original novel but in a way that has not been overdone. Amidei, who in addition to her role as co-adaptor also designed the costumes, said the design choices she made not only had to support the story but to work at “shaping the story.” Amidei said sourcing for a period piece was challenging, as they had to borrow, make and buy different items to piece together the costumes for this show. And “because of shows like Bridgeton, and the popularity of Austen in general, you can even straight up order something from Amazon,” she said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Amidei also explained the process of practicing in period costumes by providing practice garments for the actors — the men wore jackets during rehearsals to work on posture, and the women practiced walking in petticoats. Another unique aspect to their adaptation is the use of dance in propelling the storyline forward. The play features multiple balls and dance is used to showcase the emotion of the characters and draw the viewers further into the world of Austen. “That was your Facebook, your social, your TikTok, your Tinder of the Austen era, right?” Amidei said. Choreographer Kristen Rollins had never choreographed for an Austen work before but took the challenge of choreographing the balls in stride. “The dances are just great. They're the best parts of this show,” Shanahan joked. Each week when the actors had dance rehearsals Shanahan was surprised by how enthralled the company became, especially the young men. These balls still held significance, “almost like a square dance, [they] had this timeless kind of identification.” Shanahan shared. The real star of the show was the way in which everything worked together as a unit. Between the actors, choreography and technical execution the company produced a beautiful twist on a timeless tale. “The work of the students on stage, all of them together as an organism, it's astounding,” Amidei said. “Pride and Prejudice” will run from Nov. 8 to Nov. 17 at the Ronald E. Mitchell Theatre in Vilas Hall. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
The novella is a rewarding read with beautiful language and imagery. Its story also has heavy real world significance. Photo by Image courtesy of Bustle | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘The Incredible and Sad Tale of Innocent Eréndira and Her Heartless Grandmother’ is an unusual, beautiful novella By Grace Wallner April 11, 2018 | 6:00am CDT “The Incredible and Sad Tale of Innocent Eréndira and Her Heartless Grandmother” is a 1972 magical realist novella written by Gabriel García Márquez. At about 20 pages, it’s a short, yet dense read. The genre of magical realism sprouted from Latin America in the early 20th century and was soon recognized as a distinct literary and artistic phenomenon. Magical realist literature can be described as a juxtaposition of the uncanny or unexplainable with the mundanity of everyday life. The plot is centered around Eréndira, a young girl who seems to be hopelessly enslaved by her whale-like grandmother. The two live alone in a large, dilapidated mansion in the middle of a desert. One night, however, “the wind of her misfortune begins to blow,” and Eréndira falls asleep, having forgotten to blow out the candle on her nightstand. During the night, a wind sweeps through her window and knocks over the candle, setting the mansion ablaze and burning it to the ground. The imagery of the wind follows Eréndira along her journey, usually heralding an impending life change. Eréndira’s grandmother tells her granddaughter that she must pay off the debt for inadvertently burning the house down, which will take her nearly 10 years to do. The Grandmother — as the text regularly refers to her as — seems to have some uncanny power over Eréndira, who does not refuse. Eréndira and The Grandmother, who carries a mysterious suitcase of their relatives’ bones, set off into the desert, where the latter hatches a wicked business plan. She forces her granddaughter to become a sex slave, setting up a tent and picking up stragglers to create a procession that travels from village to village. The story’s folktale magic and supernatural quality serve as a way to write about a disturbing subject that might otherwise be unreadable. The continual rapes of Eréndira are shrouded under the guise of the fantastical setting and beautiful language, but they’re still ever present in the reader’s mind. As this conflict goes on, Eréndira seems to accept her fate, which angers the reader and makes for a page-turning story. Although she appears so passive, there is a sense of power in her character that the reader yearns to see clearly. There is no question the readers are rooting for Eréndira to break free from her grandmother’s clutches. However, we are reminded that in the real world, victims of sexual assault are often ignored or shamed. Realistically, the men in the story remain nameless, and they never have to take any of the blame for Eréndira’s suffering. For the remainder of the novella, the reader questions whether she will finally stand up to the evils in her life or forever be trapped in the desert, using her body to pay off the debt to her villainous grandmother. “The Incredible and Sad Tale of Innocent Eréndira and Her Heartless Grandmother” is an unusual and rewarding read with beautiful language and imagery, along with heavy real world significance. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email I definitely suggest reading it here or at a library: You’ll never know the fate of Eréndira unless you do! Final Grade: B+ Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
An adult Emerald Ash Borer. Photo courtesy of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. SCIENCE Researchers remain concerned while an invasive insect kills Wisconsin ash trees Emerald ash borer eats ash trees from the inside out, resulting in 99% mortality for trees in Dane County, according to PJ Liesch, an entomologist for the University of Wisconsin-Madison Extension. By Lindsay Pfeiffer December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST An invasive insect, the emerald ash borer (EAB), continues to kill ash trees across southern Wisconsin, including Dane County, and officials said tree mortality rates have risen. The insect is metallic green and only attacks ash trees. While the adult beetles eat ash leaves, EAB larvae eat the trees’ inner bark, killing them from the inside out. Michael Hillstrom, the invasive forest pest coordinator at the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, told The Daily Cardinal EAB is from east Asia and arrived in the United States in the early 2000s in packing crates. Wisconsin has four types of ash trees: green, white, black and blue, according to PJ Liesch, entomologist for the University of Wisconsin-Madison Extension. Green and white are commonly found in urban and forested areas, while black is found in swampy areas in the north, and blue is exceedingly rare in Wisconsin, he said. Hillstrom said that although EAB hasn’t reached the black ash yet, when it does it’ll be difficult to control. “We’re going to have major issues, where you have large areas that there are no other trees in there other than black ash or very few other trees. So it’s really difficult to access those sites to do anything about it,” he said. Wisconsin has a similar climate to EAB’s native range and is home to plenty of ash trees, making the state a perfect place for EAB to invade, according to Liesch. When EAB first arrived in Wisconsin in 2008, there were around 770 million ash trees in the state. Liesch said this is in part due to the die-off of other species of trees, like elms. When Dutch Elm disease killed off elms, ash trees became the replacement tree in many urban centers such as Milwaukee, he said. Why is EAB so threatening to ash trees? EAB larvae make s-shaped galleries in the water and food-moving tissues of the tree, which blocks the trees from moving nutrients around, Hillstrom said. As more and more larvae eat away the inner bark, the tree starts to die. “Each individual emerald ash borer larva might get up to about an inch long, but it’s death by a thousand paper cuts,” Liesch told the Cardinal. EAB is also incredibly hard to detect in the early stages. Female beetles lay their eggs in the upper branches of the tree, making it hard to detect the presence of EAB until it’s too late, Liesch said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Hillstrom said woodpeckers will eat EAB larvae, especially in the winter, by flicking off pieces of the bark in a process called “flecking.” However, woodpeckers also eat other insects, so officials have to check for other signs of EAB including D-shaped exit holes or S-shaped galleries formed by the larvae. Currently, southern Wisconsin, including Dane County, has approximately a 99% mortality rate, according to Liesch. Mortality rates are highest where EAB has been present the longest, and northern Wisconsin still has lower rates for now, he said. Hillstrom told the Cardinal that in the last few years, mortality rates have increased in Dane County, and the few ash trees left in urban areas are typically being treated for insecticide. “The vast majority of ash [in Dane County] that are not being treated by humans to keep them alive are dead at this point,” he said. How does EAB spread? Both Hillstrom and Liesch agree the biggest factor contributing to the spread of EAB is human activity. The adult beetles can fly but only up to a few miles, according to Hillstrom. The main way EAB is spread is through firewood, which is why it’s important to heat treat, age and buy local wood, he said. “If somebody from Madison’s ash tree dies and they take that wood and move it up to their cabin up north somewhere, the insects can still hatch out of that firewood and start a population in a new area,” Hillstrom said. How can EAB be controlled? Hillstrom said the most important thing to slow the spread of EAB is to create time. This allows cities and forests to respond to the dying trees as they slowly replace ash trees with other species. High-value ash trees, such as ones in residents’ yards, can be treated with insecticide, according to Hillstrom. Additionally, approximately 10,000 ash trees in Madison are treated by the city multiple times a year. Another approach to controlling EAB is biological control, a small silver lining, according to Liesch. Scientists found a small species of wasp that lives in the native range of EAB and only parasitizes EAB, he said. Hillstrom said these wasps don’t sting, and they feed on the larvae of EAB. They are released into forested areas with a lot of ash trees to combat EAB invasions. Researchers spent a lot of time and money to make sure these wasps wouldn’t harm native insects, Hillstrom said. “Those [wasps] can kill 20 to 80% of the larvae in an area, so it’s not something that’s going to get rid of emerald ash borer, but it’s another piece of that puzzle of knocking the population back, so it doesn’t spread as fast, and those trees have a chance to get bigger and produce seed,” Hillstrom said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal OPINION The economic lie: We’ve been hijacked to believing Republicans are better for the country It’s time to reject the Reagan-era dogma of trickle-down economics and stop treating it as a permanent feature of American life. By Owen Puckett October 3, 2024 | 4:00am CDT It’s a common refrain in American politics: Republicans bring economic growth, while Democrats burden the economy with taxes, regulation and spending. This narrative has been reinforced for decades, ultimately shaping elections and voter perceptions. But when we look at the data, this belief doesn’t reflect reality. In fact, by most economic measures — GDP growth, job creation and stock market performance — the Democratic Party has historically outperformed the Republicans. So why, despite decades of evidence to the contrary, do so many Americans still believe Republicans are better for the economy? At the core of the Republican economic narrative is a simple and appealing formula: lower taxes and deregulation will lead to more growth. In theory, this approach sounds logical. If businesses keep more of their profits, they’ll invest more, hire more workers and stimulate the economy. This is the essence of “supply-side” or “trickle-down” economics, a theory that gained prominence during the Reagan years and has dominated Republican economic thinking ever since. Part of the appeal of this Republican economic policy lies in its immediate impact. Tax cuts provide instant gratification. You feel it in your paycheck almost immediately. Corporations report higher profits, and the stock market often rises on the news of corporate tax reductions. These are tangible, short-term wins that create the perception of economic growth. In practice, Republican administrations have presided over the start of the last five recessions. Reagan’s tax cuts combined with a significant increase in defense spending tripled the national debt during his presidency. George W. Bush turned the Clinton-era surplus into a massive deficit through tax cuts and wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Trump administration’s 2017 tax overhaul promised that corporate tax cuts would spark a wave of new investment and wage growth. Instead, it will cost $1.9 trillion over the next 10 years and more than triple the total value of tax cuts received by the top 1-5% of households than those with incomes in the bottom 60%. Though in theory tax cuts for the wealthy and corporations should provide long-term boosts, this has repeatedly failed in practice. As a result of cuts, the federal deficit typically expands, and the benefits of these cuts disproportionately go to the wealthiest individuals and largest corporations. According to a 2012 study by the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service, there is no significant correlation between lower tax rates on the wealthy and economic growth. Meanwhile, despite being branded as “tax-and-spend” liberals, Democratic administrations have often presided over more balanced and inclusive growth. Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal played a crucial role in pulling the country out of the Great Depression. Bill Clinton left office with a budget surplus following years of rapid economic expansion. Barack Obama inherited the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression and led the country through a sustained recovery that saw 75 consecutive months of job growth along with a significant reduction in the deficit. The evidence is undeniable: Democratic policies have generally been better for the broader economy – particularly for the middle and working-class Americans – tending to focus on policies that promote shared prosperity, from expanding access to education and healthcare to raising the minimum wage and protecting labor rights. Take the Obama administration’s investment in clean energy, health care and education through the 2009 stimulus package. Critics argued the stimulus didn’t do enough to immediately revive the economy, but these investments laid the groundwork for long-term growth, particularly in sectors that are now central to the U.S. economy. The persistence of the Republican economic myth is also fueled by the media ecosystem, particularly the conservative media. Right-wing media outlets like Fox news paint Democratic policies, particularly any form of government intervention or regulation, as inherently anti-business and damaging to growth. This selective storytelling reinforces the idea that the Republican economic policies are superior, even when the data tells a different story. Under Obama, for instance, the stock market more than doubled, unemployment plummeted, and the economy added millions of jobs. Yet conservative media consistently portrayed his policies as hostile to business and responsible for “slow” recovery. In contrast, during the Trump administration, even as deficits soared and the economy grew slower than under Obama, the narrative was that Trump’s policies were creating a “historic” economic boom. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email America didn’t always have an economy so skewed in favor of the rich. In fact, for much of the 20th century, the U.S. prospered under a tax structure that seems unimaginable today. During the postwar economic boom, top marginal tax rates reached over 90%, and yet this was a period of remarkable prosperity. The American middle class thrived, wages grew and the country built some of its most crucial infrastructure, from the interstate highway system to public universities. By gutting the progressive tax system, Reagan shifted the burden onto the middle and working classes, entrenching a trickle-down ideology that has left us with rampant inequality and increased national debt. And yet, the wealthy and corporations sold this model to the public as the only path to prosperity. They hijacked the narrative and branded high taxes and government intervention as “un-American” despite the fact that these very tools had built the most prosperous and equitable economy the country had ever known. This isn’t just a matter of failed policy — it’s a systemic campaign of corporate greed and manipulation. With their endless lobbying and political donations, corporations have convinced generations of Americans that reducing their taxes will somehow benefit the entire country, despite all evidence to the contrary. They’ve weaponized a false sense of economic freedom, framing any attempt to rein in corporate excess as a threat to individual liberty. The result is an economy that benefits the few at the expense of the many, with stagnant wages, weakened labor power and crumbling public infrastructure. But we must remember that these Republican policies are not a permanent feature of the American economy. They are not inevitable. We’ve been here before, and we know that the economy is not built on tax cuts and corporate profits alone. It thrives when there is real investment in people, when policies ensure that prosperity is shared across all income levels, and when the government plays an active role in balancing growth with fairness. These ideas, now framed as “radical” by Republicans, are rooted in the very policies that built America’s middle class. It’s time to reject the Reagan-era dogma of trickle-down economics and stop treating it as a permanent feature of American life. It was always a policy designed to serve the few at the expense of the many, and it always will be. It’s time we reclaim the tools that once built a fairer, more prosperous America. The future of the economy, and the well-being of millions of Americans, depends on it. The data, after all, speaks for itself. Owen Puckett is a senior studying political science. Do you agree that the Democratic party is better for the economy? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Omar Waheed | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university I have been held accountable for my actions and I will not stand for it. This university will burn (in total damages equaling out to $270). By Omar Waheed April 27, 2024 | 1:19am CDT All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. In my final weeks at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, I was utterly betrayed by Transportation Services when it impounded my car for multiple unpaid parking tickets. Now, after paying off all the tickets and getting my car out of impound, I’m taking swift revenge. I’m going to cause at least $270 worth of property damage to UW-Madison on May 3 between 5-10 p.m. Possibly $271 so I’m up. On Tuesday, April 23, I was the victim of a horrible injustice at the hands of UW-Madison’s fascist, possibly racist, Transportation Services, deciding to impound my 2018 BMW X1 for $270 worth of unpaid parking tickets. After another riveting Tuesday morning half-asleep in my James Joyce course, which happened to meet at 7191 Hellen C. White for a screening of the movie version of “Ulysses” instead of in the depressing Humanities building as usual, I was shocked to find my 1-ton pedestrian mower gone. My mind raced thinking about the possibilities. Surely no one stole it — I hoped — since there was no more glass on the ground than normal in this filthy city. My heart dropped as I spotted a blue envelope in the grass in front of where I parked. It was the decoy ticket I never paid to avoid more tickets. I instantly knew what happened: Transportation Services took away my transportation. I sat in front of Lake Mendota not overcome by overwhelming motion sickness from bodies of water for the first time. It was a miracle. The cure for motion sickness is getting your car towed. After a few minutes scrolling through Transportation Services’ page, I found where they send all the naughty cars: Schmidt Auto. I hastily called the tow yard to figure out what it was going to cost me. Apparently, it just arrived there. I missed avoiding paying the exuberant, balderdash fines by mere minutes. The lady was nice and told me that there would be no charge from them since it just got there. Still, my car was being held for ransom contingent on me finally paying off all the tickets. It was a 50-minute walk, so I called an Uber because I refuse to ride the bus with the poors. The driver’s name was Tasir. Taisr was literally right next to me when I ordered the Uber but pulled past me a whole block away. He realized and just sat there in the street. I wasn’t going to run. My car got towed. I was already sad. I entered his Black Toyota with the standard Arabic greeting of “Assalamualaikum.” He ignored me. I knew that I was going to get there in record time. We got there in five minutes. Tasir can push a whip. I stepped out into Schmidt Auto on Beld Road and instantly looked for my missing boy. I saw the gate open and contemplated just hopping in there to take back my property, but another gate would have stopped me. BMW parts cost a lot. I couldn’t afford it on a measly reporter’s salary. I stepped into the shop where the lady instantly knew who I was (I called five minutes before) and asked me how I was doing today. What a condescending question. I was forced to pay an unjust levy for the privilege of parking where I shouldn’t have. I handed her my ID and showed her the proof that I paid the tickets. Then, she handed me a safety vest to go walk into the impound yard to get the car myself. Not even full service. What the hell am I paying for? I pulled around back to the entrance because she needed my insurance. Not sure why, but I hope this won’t affect my rates on my expired insurance from Iowa that she didn’t check the date on. I asked if I could keep the vest, and she responded with a stern “no.” This was the second most devastated I’ve been that day. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email You may be thinking this is all my fault, but I don’t believe in paying for parking at a place that does land acknowledgments. This is stolen land after all. I shouldn’t have to pay for parking on stolen land. Now, the colonizers have once again stolen from brown folk in pursuit of their endless siege against the non-white, non-Christians in the name of their “claim” to the land. Unknown to the university, on November 26, 2023, I totaled my last car, a 2006 Lexus ES330, with around $350 more worth of unpaid parking tickets. The car was under a friend’s name. They will never collect on this. I refuse to pay for a parking pass. I used to forge a pass in my first semester here. Unfortunately, UW-Madison isn’t like my undergrad at Iowa State. The look of parking passes at UW-Madison changes every semester, and it’s a lot of work to forge a pass for each lot I’m going to park in. The thickness of the material is oddly pricey, and the shape is hard to carve accurately. I think it’s only fair that now I, Omar Taimoore Waheed — grad student typically found in Vilas between 3:30-6 p.m. on the fifth floor — gets to destroy at least $270 worth of property at UW-Madison as reparations. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Photo by Drew Wesson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison cut the ribbon on BRT, but is it all it’s cracked up to be? Madison Metro’s BRT system offers riders a new and improved experience, but some students say it just is not good enough. By Jake Piper October 16, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The city of Madison launched their new bus rapid transit (BRT) system on Sep. 24, offering riders a new and improved rapid route and 62 new, fully electric bendy buses deployed across all routes to reduce wait times and delays. While some riders are pleased with the new bus system, others say the new buses are flashy and don’t offer meaningful improvements over last year’s revised routes. Madison Metro Transit released a statement on Friday warning BRT users of potential service outages until the end of the month, with routes B, 28 and 38 being the primarily impacted lines. This outage comes after District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan characterized the rollout of BRT as having “a lot of kinks.” However, Govindarajan is certain that given time, Metro will be able to work out delays in the BRT system. “It’s not a one night change,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal. Even though the $351 million price tag seems costly, Govindarajan said the city has only paid for 6% of the figure out of pocket, with the other 94% being covered by funding from the state and federal government. “This really hasn’t impacted the city a whole lot financially,” Govindarajan said. “When you look at what Metro used to cost in 2014, we have actually continued to fund Metro at pretty much the same levels accounting for inflation.” Govindarajan also said the BRT initiative significantly improved bus routes since last year, removing an excess of numbered lines and creating the new letter line routes. “Before BRT, if you wanted to get from downtown campus to West Towne Mall, you would have to get on bus 2 or bus 7 and then go to the West Transfer Point,” Govindarajan said. “The whole thing would take 45 to 50 minutes. Now with BRT, you can get there in 25 minutes.” In addition to more direct routes, the BRT system implemented red bus only lanes and dedicated bus stop lights, which Govindarajan said allows buses to get through stop lights and areas of high congestion faster than traditional cars. Still, students remain cautious about the new bus lines. Since coming to campus, University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Reesa Karamanski told the Cardinal the buses are “always late,” and she is “never been able to accurately tell when they’ll arrive.” Brooke Manteufel, a sophomore at UW-Madison, said the new system has been “overall pretty positive,” but the buses don’t seem much more reliable than last year. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email New bus pass system causes confusion, frustration among students Govindarajan and the students all agreed the new system for picking up a bus pass this year was difficult. Before this fall, student bus passes were given out by the Associated Students of Madison (ASM), but with the advent of the new BRT bus lines, Metro Madison gave responsibility to UW Transportation Services instead. Govindarajan said this change made him “a little upset” to see the “loss of power” normally afforded to ASM. Students too were upset at the change from past years. Elias Cassis, a senior at UW-Madison, bluntly said the new system for picking up bus passes was “confusing and sucked ass.” His biggest complaints were the lack of warning and clarity from the university about the new system and the confusing nature of signing up online for a bus pass. In the past, he said all he had to do “was come down to Union South and swipe my student ID.” Manteufel agreed the process for applying for a bus pass was “annoying.” She said she struggled to find what website bus passes could be found on and when she did it was “unclear” which bus pass she was supposed to get. Govindarajan acknowledged his and other students' frustrations with the new bus pass system, but reassured students that come next semester, just like the BRT lines, the process would be much more streamlined. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of Pinchofhealth/Flickr SCIENCE UW-Madison genetic scientists sound alarm on AI overreliance, say there are persistent flaws in data Researchers in the Genetics-Biotechnology Center at UW-Madison published a study in September, raising concerns over issues found in AI-assisted genome-wide association studies and offer new statistical methods for improvement. By Marco Lama November 21, 2024 | 3:00am CST Researchers in the Genetics-Biotechnology Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, led by associate professor Qiongshi Lu, published a study Sept. 30 in Nature Genetics raising concerns over persistent problems found in artificial intelligence-assisted genome-wide association studies. Broadly, genome-wide association studies search for links between genetic variation and health traits. This process requires large amounts of genetic and health related data, which come from “biobanks” that collect and store biological data. Based on links found in these datasets, scientists can predict future health risks for people with certain genetic traits. But attempting to predict certain health risks is challenging. “Some outcomes are very easy to measure. If you want to study the genetics of height, it’s easy to measure everyone’s height and DNA and just link them to identify associations. But if you want to study, say, Alzheimer’s, it gets tricky,” Lu said. Collecting and studying the traits of diseases like Alzheimer’s in large numbers is difficult because there isn’t enough prevalence in the datasets. This is mostly because collecting this type of data is extremely resource intensive. Without enough data, researchers don’t have the statistical power to make health-risk predictions. As a result, it has become popular in recent years to leverage AI tools, which can infer unknown traits based on proxy data. This allows scientists to work around the challenge of missing data by assigning traits to individuals in whom that trait has not been actually observed. But Lu said the inferences don’t account for their own uncertainty. Jiacheng Miao, a Ph.D. student in the Biomedical Data Science Program at UW-Madison and co-author of the study published in Nature Genetics, told The Daily Cardinal many scientists “are pretending that outcomes produced by AI are the gold standard, but we show that this is actually a pretty bad idea.” “For example, we have hospital-recorded diabetes statuses of individuals. So we created an AI predicted diabetes status to compare the results, and we found that they differ a lot,” he said. Further comparisons revealed persistent flaws in traits produced by AI. In response to these findings, Lu’s team developed a new statistical framework to improve the quality of AI inferences. While the results have been well-received within the field of genome research, they have not yet been widely implemented since Lu and his colleagues are some of the first to advance this discussion in genome-wide association studies, Lu said. Impacts The results of genome research are often used in developing therapeutic drugs. However, it’s possible that without the right statistical frameworks in place, these drugs will be developed based on contaminated data. While drugs built on false data would likely not make it past testing stages, Lu said developing those ineffective treatments “is a huge waste of resources.” “You could spend 10 years focusing on a therapeutic intervention strategy just to realize it’s false,” Lu said. “We need frontier methodology to guard people against spurious findings, so that we can really efficiently advance the field of medical sciences.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marco LamaMarco is a features writer for The Daily Cardinal. He is an English and History major and has experience covering local businesses. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Zoe Bendoff | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET Ask Morgan, holiday special edition: How to deal with oversized trees, your boyfriend’s mom Sometimes the only way to get rid of something is by causing a “little accident.” By Morgan McCormack December 15, 2023 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Q: Hey Morgan, I’m spending the holidays with my boyfriend’s family for the first time this year and I’m really excited, the only problem is his mother. I’ve met her a few times, and she’s always been cold and standoffish. Turns out she doesn’t like how I dress. The thing is I don’t even dress that weird, but she always makes snide comments about it. At this point, I don’t know if it’s actually my clothes or if she just doesn’t like me. What should I do? Ah, a tale as old as time. Sometimes it feels like your boyfriend’s mother is out to get you. Actually, sometimes it feels like any mother is out to get you. In fact, my own mother doesn’t like how I dress, but this sadly isn’t about me. Listen, mothers have to go through a lot — society, patriarchy and failing marriages where their husbands talk about their secretaries a little too much. I am tempted to say cut her some slack. But if you don’t grow a backbone, what’s stopping you from becoming the mother that rips on the way their son’s girlfriend dresses in the future? This is what you have to do. Calling her out is obviously out of the question because then you’re the bad guy. The only way to stop the comments is to have the source change her mind. You may now say, “but I’ve tried everything!” Well, have you tried dressing like her? Think about it — all you have to do is stalk her Facebook, make a style inspo Pinterest board and take a trip to Old Navy. When she sees you this year looking like her twin, what’s she going to say? Nothing negative, that’s for sure. She’ll either be flattered and glad you listened to her comments or will be too stunned to even say anything. Either way is a win. I hope this helps! Q: Hey Morgan, my roommate put up this massive Christmas tree in our apartment, and it’s driving me crazy. First of all, it barely fits. I’ve run into it multiple times trying to go to the bathroom or the kitchen in the middle of the night. I also know it’s racking up our electrical bill because it’s wrapped with way too many lights. She seems like she really likes it and I don’t want to hurt her feelings by asking her to take it down, but I can’t take it anymore. What should I do? This is a toughy because you don’t want to come across as a grinch not wanting to bask in the Christmas cheer or bright LED lights, but you still need to get that tree out of there. Sometimes the only way to get rid of something is by causing a “little accident.” It’s like when I’m worried about not making any money with a creative writing degree, so I subtly butter my wealthy grandmother’s stairs. It hasn’t worked yet, but we’ll get there. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Anyway, let me shed some light on how to get rid of your problem. You say your tree is covered in those LED Christmas lights, right? Well, maybe one day when she’s in class, the lights begin to, I don’t know, “overheat” a bit. And let’s just say that, maybe, the tree starts on fire. A very small, manageable controlled fire that only burns/melts the tree to the point it’s ruined. Sure, your roommate will be upset. But she won’t be upset with you, which is all that really matters. If the fire does happen to get out of control, I hope you have renters insurance. Hope this helps! Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Morgan McCormackMorgan McCormack is the beet editor for The Daily Cardinal. More I graduated from PETA University. Now I electroejaculate monkeys Catch me feds! I ballot stuffed 450 times in the 2024 election I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university
Photo by Jonathan Mintz | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center The defeat marks the first loss of the No. 11 Wisconsin men’s basketball team’s season. By Jacob Szczap December 7, 2024 | 10:01am CST The No. 11 Wisconsin men’s basketball team couldn’t keep their spark alive Tuesday night to beat the Michigan Wolverine in a hard battle, falling 67-64. The game featured two teams with pairs of seven-footers, and down the stretch, Michigan’s duo of giants emerged victorious. During a back-and-forth second half that featured nine lead changes, the Badgers ultimately couldn’t contain Michigan’s partnership of forward Danny Wolf and center Vladislav Goldin. The loss marks the first for Wisconsin, now 8-1 (0-1 Big Ten). The Wolverines improved to 7-1 (1-0 Big Ten). Wolf and Goldin accounted for 44 of the Wolverines’ 67 points, paving the way to a victory and frustrating Wisconsin head coach Greg Gard and an arena full of Badgers fans. With one Wisconsin seven-footer, forward Steven Crowl, caught up in foul trouble and eventually fouling out with just over three minutes left in the game, the duo’s constant attacking with ball screens was too much for the other forward Nolan Winter and the Badgers defense to handle. Over the game’s final two minutes and 23 seconds, Goldin scored the final six points, finishing with a game-high 24. "We just weren't physical enough, weren't intent on the ball screen with what we were doing,” Winter said after the game. “It's on both of us as bigs, and we know that. We've already talked, and we know we have to be better, and Steve [Crowl] knows he has to stay out of foul trouble because we need him and the presence that he brings us.” Meanwhile, Wisconsin’s offense crumpled as Goldin hit big shots down the stretch. While trailing late in the game, the Badgers got decent looks from guard Max Klesmit on three separate possessions, but the senior failed to cash in on each attempt, capping off a tough evening offensively. Klesmit shot 3-14 from the field, including 1-9 from three, and finished with eight points. “Max has made those shots before,” Gard said after the game. “He’s in a slump right now, we’re gonna help him get out of it.” On a testy night offensively, the guard play of John Tonje and John Blackwell led Wisconsin. Tonje finished with 18 points on 5-12 shooting, three rebounds and three assists while Blackwell scored 16 points on 6-12 shooting and accumulated a team-high nine rebounds. Winter, Klesmit and guard Kamari McGee added eight points each. The Badgers shot 22-64 from the field and a mere 6-27 from three. In the first half, Wisconsin received a well-distributed scoring performance from Winter, Tonje, Klesmit and Blackwell, each scoring six points en route to a 32-26 halftime lead. Even as Tonje’s first-half minutes were limited due to foul trouble, Wisconsin’s offense looked formidable without their leader. After Tonje subbed out of the game with 6:26 remaining in the half, the Badgers rattled off an impressive 10-0 run, capped off by a pair of assisted dunks from Winter that put them ahead 29-20. At that point, the Badgers had done a decent job containing Wolf and Goldin and had played mostly well-connected, in-sync defense. While Wolf and Goldin accounted for 16 of the Wolverines’ 26 first-half points, the Badgers did a phenomenal job locking down the perimeter. Michigan shot only 7-33 from the field and 2-16 from three in the first half, finishing the half on a 7:42 field goal drought with 11 straight misses. But in the second half, Michigan’s offense began to pick up, relying more on Goldin and Wolf, giving Wisconsin’s defense plenty of issues. In the half’s first five minutes, Goldin got hot fast, quickly scoring ten points to guide Michigan to a 42-41 lead. Mixed in was a three-pointer from Wolf that demonstrated his ability score in a variety of ways. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email With the game tight, and Michigan’s offense heating up, Blackwell began to lead Wisconsin’s offense. On three consecutive possessions, Blackwell delivered big-time buckets, putting back a couple of second-chance layups before hitting a smooth pull-up jumper with 12:19 left to make the score 47-44 Wisconsin. For the next few minutes, the Badgers and Wolverines continued to trade baskets, Tonje hitting free throws and a three to re-take the lead at 55-54 on a physical and-one bucket and a made free throw from McGee with 7:11 remaining. But 19 seconds later, Crowl picked up his fourth foul and was immediately replaced by Winter. With the game tied at 55, Winter then lost the ball on offense, resulting in a turnover, got caught in no-man’s land on defense on a Wolf lay-up and was then blocked by Michigan guard Roddy Gayle Jr. after passing up a wide-open wing three. Then, after Wolf and Blackwell traded multiple buckets and Gayle Jr. made a lay-up, McGee hit another huge shot — this time a three — to give Wisconsin a 62-61 lead with 4:14 remaining. But Wisconsin would only convert on one more field goal all night, a Klesmit turn-around jumper to give the Badgers a three-point advantage with 2:37 remaining. With Crowl fouled out, Goldin went to work in the paint and flipped the tide in favor of the Wolverines. Wisconsin had multiple chances in the game’s final moments but failed to convert. In a game that could have gone either way, Wisconsin fell. After the loss, Wisconsin seemed frustrated but not shaken and will now have to soak in its first true adversity of the season before their toughest test of the season thus far. The Badgers head to Milwaukee on Dec. 7 to take on in-state rival No. 5 Marquette. “I think we are going to respond great,” Blackwell said after the loss. “I think we have a great group of vets who have been through this. I mean, you're not going to win every game. We're going to be just fine. We're going to build off this loss, take it on the chin and just keep moving forward." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Aspen trees eaten leafless by spongy moth caterpillars on June 18, 2021. Photo courtesy of Mark Zierden/UW-Madison. SCIENCE Invasive spongy moths strip aspen tree foliage, damage a native species, UW-Madison researcher says Rick Lindroth at the University of Wisconsin-Madison found that spongy moth caterpillars strip aspen tree foliage, increasing tree defenses and causing harm to a native species. By Lindsay Pfeiffer September 12, 2024 | 5:00am CDT Invasive spongy moths are defoliating aspen trees and making their leaves regrow with high levels of toxins, harming a native insect, according to recent research from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. In 2021, Rick Lindroth, UW-Madison entomology professor emeritus, began noticing this effect. After his research group originally planted aspen trees in 2010 to conduct other experiments on the trees at the Arlington Agricultural Research Station, a spongy moth outbreak occurred following their absence during COVID-19 in 2020. The research team — made up of Lindroth, visiting scientist Patricia Fernandez, former graduate student Clay Morrow and post-doctorate Mark Zierden — had to take a different route according to Lindroth. “When we walked into the aspen stand in spring 2021, we realized there were thousands of egg masses — each egg mass contains 400 to 600 larva — and we were not anticipating that. I knew right then that we were doomed to have a major defoliating outbreak of spongy moths,” Lindroth told The Daily Cardinal. Spongy moths, which arrived in North America from Europe in 1869, only entered Wisconsin in the early 2000s, according to Lindroth. They feed on more than 300 species of trees and can defoliate trees for miles, which can harm entire forests, he said. When the outbreak occurred on aspen trees at the Arlington Agricultural Research Station, the researchers instead decided to study the consequences of spongy moth defoliation on the native polyphemus silk moth, the second-largest moth in North America. “What we were looking at is the legacy effect of the defoliation that carried on in terms of food quality for the native polyphemus moth,” Lindroth said. Although these two species don’t directly interact, both moths feed on aspen trees at different times of the year. “Spongy moths feed early in the season and then they’re done. Polyphemus moths feed mid- to late summer so anything the spongy moths do to alter food quality will impact the polyphemus moth,” Lindroth said.. Aspen trees produce salicylate-like compounds, which can be highly toxic at high levels, according to Lindroth. The compounds are similar to aspirin as they are made up of a salicin derivative and are known as salicinoids, he noted. “A spongy moth caterpillar feeding on a tree with normal levels of these salicinoids would consume, in human terms, 5-7 pounds of aspirin in a day. Imagine what that would do to your gut,” Lindroth said. When the spongy moth eats aspen leaves in the spring, the aspen trees respond by reflushing a new set of leaves. But these leaves have eight times the levels of salicinoid defenses that they previously had, according to Lindroth. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email And although spongy moths and polyphemus moths have both adapted to eat these toxins at normal levels, when aspen trees increase their defenses following the spongy moth’s feeding season, it overwhelms polyphemus caterpillars’ ability to detoxify them, Lindroth said. This can result in lesions in the gut, septicemia, hemorrhaging and death, he said. Spongy moth outbreaks don’t only negatively affect the polyphemus moth. They also degrade aspen trees. Aspen trees that have lost their leaves even once have a dramatic reduction in growth for the year, according to Lindroth. At the Arlington plot, he said their aspen trees were more susceptible to disease and drought years later, causing some to die. Additionally, Lindroth told the Cardinal aspens are the most widely distributed tree species in North America and therefore aid a great deal in carbon sequestration, the process of capturing carbon dioxide from the air, which helps combat climate change. Other research done by Lindroth has shown that when trees photosynthesize, they can use the energy produced to either grow or make defense compounds. Growth creates carbon sequestration, he said. “I think we can make the argument that invasive species like spongy moths can negatively affect the capacity of aspen forest to sequester carbon by removing leaves so the trees aren’t photosynthesizing, and when the leaves reflush, they’re busy making defense compounds rather than growing,” Lindroth said. Lindroth underscored that there is currently no experimental evidence for this, but it has potential to be a serious implication for the spongy moth outbreaks. To combat this, the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection is part of a federal “Slow the Spread” program that aims to prevent spongy moths from traveling westward and to aid in treatment of isolated outbreaks. Treatments include aerially spraying a bacterial insecticide or spraying wax droplets containing pheromone to stop male spongy moths from finding females. Although some insecticide sprays may be able to treat larger outbreaks, Lindroth said that once they’ve been established in an area, there’s not much that can be done to contain the outbreak completely. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Johnathan Dye | The Daily Cardinal VOLLEYBALL Badger volleyball gets swept by No. 2 Nebraska for second time this season The Nebraska Cornhuskers have not swept the Badgers twice in one season since 2012. By Eliana Mann November 27, 2024 | 4:32pm CST Raucous fans packed the Bob Devaney Sports Center in Lincoln, Nebraska Saturday evening to watch the No. 6 University of Wisconsin-Madison volleyball team take on the No. 2 University of Nebraska. The last time these two heavyweight teams competed against each other, Nebraska came away with a dominant three-set win in Madison at the beginning of November. Their second match-up ended the same way, marking the first time since 2012 that Nebraska has swept Wisconsin twice in one season. The Badgers won the first point of the senior night match in Nebraska with a kill by fifth-year outside hitter Sarah Franklin. But the Huskers responded with a seven-point run, and the Badgers were never able to retake the lead. A kill from senior outside hitter Taylor Landfair gave the Huskers set one, 25-21. In similar fashion to the first set, the second set got off to a shaky start for the Badgers due to a six-point Nebraska run. Later in the set, though, Wisconsin strung together four points that included three massive blocks. Fifth-year middle blocker CC Crawford earned a service ace to bring the Badgers within one point of the Huskers. The two teams traded points back and forth from there, but an unfortunate overpass by the Badgers resulted in another Landfair kill to win the set for Nebraska, 25-22. The third set seemed to be going better for the Badgers as they started off with a 3-1 lead. Senior right-side hitter Anna Smrek earned two blocks in the first four Wisconsin points to help build their lead. Although Wisconsin started the set on a 5-2 run, Nebraska quickly responded with a 9-1 run of their own. Nebraska’s energy remained high, feeding off the enthusiasm of their fans. A kill from senior outside hitter Merritt Beason closed out the set 25-17 in favor of the Huskers. Despite losing the match, the Badgers out-blocked the Huskers 11-7. Junior middle blocker Carter Booth earned six of those blocks, while Smrek contributed five. As a team, the Badgers hit just .169 on the match. Franklin led the team with 10 kills, Booth had seven and Smrek had six. Freshman libero Lola Schumacher was still out with an injury, so redshirt freshman Saige Damrow got her third consecutive start at libero. She earned nine digs against the Huskers. Freshman setter Charlie Fuerbringer continued to perform well with 27 assists. With this win, Nebraska ended their regular season at home with an impressive 41-match win streak. Wisconsin has two more matches at home to end the season, and the next one is on Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. against Ohio State at the UW Field House. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Creator Peter Kiesewalter and violinist Whitney La Grange. Photo courtesy of Peter Kiesewalter. ARTS The Moth Project to spread its wings at Overture Center Peter Kiesewalter of The Moth Project spoke with The Daily Cardinal about his influences for science-art fusion. By Sonia Bendre October 23, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The Moth Project, an original production composed of 12 songs set to moth videography, will show at the Overture Center for the Arts on Oct. 24 at 8 p.m. The 75-minute show features Grammy-nominated creator Peter Kiesewalter as pianist and his partner Whitney La Grange as violinist, both dressed in white. Throughout the show, images and videos of moths project onto a screen behind them. The media is from around the world, but many of the shots are from Kiesewalter’s own cottage in Canada. Kiesewalter first conceived of the idea during the COVID-19 pandemic, when he spent time at the cottage in Canada with his brother, an interpretive naturalist, and the two’s six collective children. Kiesewalter was out of work and worrying about how to pay rent. While at the cottage, his brother, usually a birder, picked up “mothing,” at one point documenting 87 species of moths in a single night. Kiesewalter was astounded. “I've been coming to this cottage for 45 years, and I didn't even know,” he said. “I thought there were the brown ones and the ones that eat your socks, basically.” He started paying attention, and over months of campfires, The Moth Project came together. Two years later, it aired for the first time at a town hall near the cottage. The second show was in Cleveland at the National Association for Interpretation Conference, where it received glowing reviews. Kiesewalter was inspired by a broader movement in science to use art to raise awareness of climate change, reaching people in a way that impacts them emotionally. “[Scientists] were saying, ‘we’ve got to figure out other ways to get the message across that the world needs our attention,’” he said. The Moth Project has since been presented at botanical gardens, academic conferences and theaters across Canada and the United States. The show contains covers and six original songs, inspired by classical, bluegrass and R&B music. Bach and Joni Mitchell covers play alongside original works with titles like “Emergence” and “Pheromones.” “That's by design, to reflect the diversity of the moth species,” Kiesewalter said. “There's 160,000 different moth species, so I thought that a show about or inspired by moths warranted a sort of eclectic musical palette. All the music in the show is from different parts of my musical education and upbringing.” Kiesewalter, who plays the clarinet, saxophone, piano and accordion among other instruments, currently resides in New York with La Grange and two of their children. He moved to New York after graduating from Ottawa University with degrees in classical clarinet and jazz saxophone performance. In New York, he found klezmer, a style of Jewish instrumental folk music. At various points in his life, he has also played jazz, Americana, bluegrass, Cajun and zydeco music. All of these, he says, feature to some degree in The Moth Project. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email From 1999 to 2005, Kiesewalter worked for ABC News as the resident composer, writing scores for films, shows and television productions. After working at ABC, Kiesewalter started a rock band called the East Village Opera Company that played modern renditions of classical opera music in German, Italian and French. The band signed a record deal with Universal Studios, received an Emmy Award and was nominated for a Grammy. Kiesewalter played with the East Village Opera Company for eight years. Since then, he has produced commercially and for individual artists. The Moth Project is a return to the road for Kiesewalter, and a welcome one. “I like the details of putting a show together and making things work smoothly,” Kiesewalter said. “I do still like getting in front of people and moving people… It fuels me.” Kiesewalter integrated the story of his parents’ immigration from Germany into the project, where he connected their migration to moth migration. “It's a pretty common story, like the migration story of lots of animals,” Kiesewalter said. “Migration stories are generally stories of: why do these animals or people move? The main reason is survival. Germany after the war was decimated. There was nothing.” His parents moved to Canada in the 1950s and “worked their asses off” to stay, Kiesewalter said. “All of the same things that affect the moth, or all of nature, affect my parents — life, death, transformation, metamorphosis, migration. It's a very personal show,” Kiesewalter said. Kiesewalter hopes The Moth Project will inspire viewers to pay more attention to nature for their own sake. “Being mindful of nature doesn't have to be a chore or an effort,” Kiesewalter said. “You don't have to do it for the benefit of the earth. Do it for the benefit of yourself, because the sheer beauty of it is all the reason we need to actually start treating the earth a little better.” In contrast to the negativity often surrounding climate change, Kiesewalter tries to employ the same messaging that ecologist and author Robin Wall Kimmerer uses in “Braiding Sweetgrass”: the Earth is a gift, and our connection to it is sacred. “Nature, moths, are incredibly beautiful. Pay attention to them for a sec, and it'll change the way that you integrate with the natural world,” he said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Badgers squander opportunities, come up short versus conference leaders After a hot start to conference play, the Badgers met their match against Northwestern, losing all three games over the weekend. By Justin Alpert April 17, 2023 | 12:58pm CDT Northwestern (28-9, 13-1) swept the weekend series over Wisconsin (22-14, 7-5) at Goodman Diamond. That said, the Badgers kept each game close and proved they aren’t far behind elite conference opponents like the Wildcats. Wisconsin had rolled through its first nine Big Ten matchups in dominant fashion, going 7-2 against Michigan State, Illinois and Purdue — three of the conference’s worst teams. The Big Ten-leading and 20th-ranked Northwestern Wildcats were sure to offer stiffer competition when they came to Madison for a three-game set this weekend, and that they did. Consistent across the three games was Wisconsin falling behind early. The Badgers, who’ve made a habit of building early leads in 2023, couldn’t get their offense going until the later innings, if ever. Friday | 1-0 L Starter Maddie Schwartz lost the strike zone in the second inning. The trusty veteran hit a batter, walked three and gifted Northwestern what proved to be the game’s only run. Schwartz (L, 8-8) then settled in and completed an impressive, seven-inning start with five strikeouts, four walks and four hits allowed. Wisconsin matched Northwestern’s four-hit total and squandered a few opportunities with runners in scoring position. The most glaring was the sixth inning, when a Kayla Konwent walk and singles by Brooke Kuffel and Ellie Hubbard loaded the bases with nobody out. Anything from a slow roller to a fly ball would’ve tied the game and a base hit likely would’ve given Wisconsin the lead, but Christaana Angelopulos struck out looking. Peyton Bannon then grounded into a double play to end the inning. The Badgers went quietly in a 1-2-3 seventh inning and lost the winnable series opener. Northwestern’s Lauren Boyd and Danielle Williams (W, 10-1) combined to strike out nine Badgers while walking just two. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Saturday | 6-3 L Paytn Monticelli, who allowed three runs in four innings of Wednesday’s doubleheader versus St. Thomas, started Saturday’s first game. Like Schwartz, the freshman’s control issues gave Northwestern an early lead — two walks and a hit-by-pitch put the Wildcats up 1-0 in the second inning. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Unlike Schwartz, however, Monticelli (L, 5-2) was unable to settle in and exited in the third inning after allowing a pair of two-out hits and a second run. The Badgers finally scored in the bottom of the third as Katie Keller turned on an inside pitch and launched a no-doubter to right field. Tessa Magnanimo struggled in relief, allowing a solo home run in the fifth and three more runs in the sixth. Keller homered again in the seventh to cut Wisconsin’s deficit to 6-3. A Konwent walk and Kuffel single brought the tying run to the plate with nobody out, but the middle of the order couldn’t keep the rally going. Three runs — all thanks to Keller — was an underwhelming total considering Wildcat starter Cami Henry’s lack of control. Henry (W, 10-1) walked five batters and hit one in six-plus innings. Wisconsin made seven fly-ball outs versus Henry, though, consistently failing to advance runners and capitalize on the free passes. Saturday | 4-3 L Northwestern opened the scoring once again with three unearned fourth-inning runs off Schwartz. Second baseman Rylie Crane’s error opened the door for Northwestern’s rally. The freshman Crane has impressed with a .274 average, but her defense has proven costly on various occasions. The Badgers responded with one run on Ellie Hubbard’s RBI single in the bottom of the fourth. It likely would’ve scored two had pinch-runner Bree Mitchell held up at third on the previous play. Mitchell had been thrown out trying to score from first on a wall-ball double by Keller. Wisconsin still trailed 3-1 with two outs in the seventh when pinch-hitter Emily Bojan floated a bloop single to right. Molly Schlosser followed with a game-tying blast to center field — excellent timing for the sophomore’s first career home run. The series finale was Schwartz’s game to win or lose, and she finally faltered in the top of the ninth. Shortstop Maeve Nelson drew a leadoff walk and came around to score on a sacrifice fly, giving the Wildcats a 4-3 lead. Down to their final out once again, the Badgers threatened again with an Ava Kuszak double. Northwestern intentionally walked Konwent, opting to instead face the red-hot Keller. Williams (W, 11-1) struck Keller out to secure the weekend sweep. Schwartz (L, 8-9) got unlucky in her nine-inning, 124-pitch effort. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. A step behind To be considered among the Big Ten’s best, Wisconsin must find ways to advance runners and manufacture runs in close games like these. The Badgers’ unremarkable speed is one factor and isn’t an easy midseason fix. Wisconsin ranks 10th in the conference with 29 stolen bases. Their 65% success rate ranks last, though, so running more often may not be a solution. Despite the three losses, there were a lot of positives about Wisconsin’s performance this weekend. The Badgers actually outhit Northwestern 20-19 and drew 12 walks to the Wildcats’ nine — this suggests both Wisconsin’s pitchers and hitters can compete with the Big Ten leaders. Keller clearly wasn’t fazed by Northwestern’s formidable pitching staff in her two-homer Saturday performance. In fact, the first baseman has been a tough out for all opponents lately. Over her last 10 games, Keller has hit .467 with three doubles, four home runs, five walks and nine RBI while striking out just four times. Keller now boasts a 1.054 OPS and will be an essential piece of Wisconsin’s postseason push. Schlosser appears to be heating up as well, going 7-for-15 with four RBI over the last five games. Typically hitting ninth in the order, Schlosser is setting up Keller, Konwent and Kuffel for more RBI opportunities while putting up runs on her own, as seen with the game-tying home run Saturday. Wisconsin, now fifth in the Big Ten standings, will look to get back in the win column with a Wednesday doubleheader versus ninth-place Minnesota (25-16, 6-6) at Goodman Diamond. The Badgers will then hit the road for consecutive weekend series at Nebraska (30-13, 10-4) and Maryland (29-13, 6-8). Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Aimon Van Houten | The Daily Cardinal SPORTS Wisconsin hosts NCAA Cross Country Championships in thrilling end to season The Wisconsin men’s cross country team outperformed expectations in a star-studded field, while the women’s team fell short. By Aimon Van Houten November 26, 2024 | 1:46pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison cross country team were back on their home course for the fourth and final time of the season, hosting the NCAA Cross Country Championships for the first time since 2018 when Badgers’ alumni Morgan McDonald took home the individual title. Though race conditions were far from perfect — soft ground and a slight wind exacerbated the chilly morning air — the extremely talented fields from both the men’s and women’s races assured that fast times were in order. The women’s 6k race went first, and the Badgers women placed 22nd out of 31 teams for the second year in a row. Despite being ranked 14th in the nation, the women were buried early in the race with their frontrunner all the way back in 99th place through the halfway point. Though they still could have salvaged the race, the women failed to move up when they needed to. Senior Lindsay Cunningham was the first to cross the line for the Badgers, placing 111th with a time of 20:36.6. Sophomore Annika Cutforth (20:46.4), senior Shae Ruhly (20:47.2), sophomore Bella Jacobsen (20:48.0), senior Carolyn Shult (20:51.8) and freshman Nora Gremban (20:52.7) finished soon after. None of the Badgers improved from their times at Pre-Nationals just one month ago. Sophomore Doris Lemngole from Alabama won the race as an individual with a time of 19:21.0, beating out New Mexico freshman Pamela Kosgei, owner of the current course record with her win at Pre Nationals in October. No. 1 Brigham Young University won the team title by 17 points over No. 4 West Virginia. The Badger men’s 10k race started off in the same fashion as the women’s. The men were all the way back in 27th place through the 1k of the race, with their frontrunner in 123rd. But this was their worst positioning in the race, as each scorer climbed over 100 places before the last kilometer. Graduate student Bob Liking had an excellent race to end his career as a Badger, climbing over 150 places by the end of the race to finish 16th in the nation (29:09.2). He was just one second off breaking the previous course record (29:08.3), which was taken down by 14 separate runners. Behind Liking, the Badgers had a powerful pack of four runners split by just 10 seconds. Though starting off conservatively, they each moved up 1k throughout the race, eventually dropping Wisconsin’s team score from 27th to fourth. Senior Adam Spencer (29:30.1) led the way for the pack, with sophomore Micah Wilson (29:34.4), freshman Matan Ivri (29:36.2) and freshman Christian de Vaal (29:40.5) not far behind. The No. 7 Badgers exceeded their expectations by placing fourth overall, upsetting powerhouses like No. 2 Oklahoma State and No. 5 New Mexico along the way. Harvard senior and 2024 Olympian Graham Blanks completed his repeat title after winning individually in last year’s meet. Blanks came through with a time of 28:37.2, beating the previous course record by a jaw-dropping 31.1 seconds. No. 1 ranked Brigham Young University also won the men's team title with a score of 124. This marked the first time a university won both team titles since Colorado pulled it off in 2002. The Badger’s impressive fourth-place finish was a big improvement from the previous year’s 10th. In front of a hometown crowd at Thomas Zimmer, the men finished off a very satisfying season with a huge victory. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball drops all three games against Nebraska Wisconsin Badgers softball sits at 12-20 on the season after three back-to-back losses against Nebraska. By Abby Shulman April 1, 2024 | 9:16pm CDT For their second series and first home series of the Big Ten season, the Wisconsin Badgers softball team challenged the Nebraska Huskers at the Goodman Softball Complex but fell short in all three games. The Badgers started the series with a high-scoring game that resulted in an 11-7 loss Friday. The game picked up in the top of the second, with pitcher Gabi Salo giving up a three-run homer. The Badgers retaliated in the next frame, leading 4-3 after catcher Emmy Wells slugged her ninth homer of the season, infielder Ellie Hubbard hit an RBI single and infielder Ava Kuszak hit a two-run double. Following a scoreless third inning, the Huskers and Badgers were tied 7-7 by the end of the fourth after reciprocated scoring during both frames. Pitcher Shelby Jacobson allowed back-to-back two-run singles for an initial 7-4 lead, but Wisconsin put the Huskers in their place at their home field, hitting four straight with another RBI from Kuszak and two runs driven in from infielder Fiona Girardot’s single. However, Nebraska responded with three more home runs over the next few innings, eventually winning 11-7. Saturday’s game mirror Friday’s scoring trends The Huskers led 2-0 in the top of the first off of starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo before the Badgers bounced back again in the second inning. Wisconsin tied the game 2-2 after a series of hits including a lead-off double from catcher Hilary Blomberg, an RBI from Hubbard and a triple from outfielder Peyton Bannon. Both teams scored once in the third — an RBI from Nebraska and a sacrifice fly from Wisconsin’s Girardot — to raise the score to 3-3. Wisconsin played nearly flawless defense throughout the rest of the game except for the fifth inning, after which Jacobson took over the mound from Magnanimo. However, the Badgers’ offense faltered, and back-to-back home runs in the fifth inning put the Huskers up 7-3 to seal game two. Despite losing by a landslide, Wisconsin’s offense notched 11 hits compared to Nebraska’s nine. Nebraska finished off in dramatic fashion Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Identical to the start of Saturday’s game, Nebraska kicked off a 2-0 lead in the top of the first on a throwing error from Salo before Wisconsin tied it up in the bottom of the second. There were a total of ten hits throughout the game, including a lead-off double from Blomberg, an RBI from Hubbard, a triple from Bannon and an RBI from infielder Alivia Bark to catch up two apiece. Magnanimo took the mound in the third and gave up a run, giving the Huskers a 3-2 lead. While Nebraska proceeded to play a dry few innings, Wisconsin outdid them to take a 4-3 lead after Kuszak and Bannon crushed solo homers in the fifth and sixth, respectively. The Huskers tied the game in the seventh after a ball slipped from outfielder Kate Linkletter’s glove. Pushing through two more innings of the uphill battle against the Huskers, Bannon finally conquered the ball, slamming into the wall during the eighth to record an out and keep Nebraska from scoring and stealing the lead. However, Nebraska capitalized in the ninth to take the lead as Wisconsin failed to make a comeback in the last frame. The Badgers will take on in-state competition Green Bay in a doubleheader on Tuesday, April 2 at home at the Goodman Diamond. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by The Daily Cardinal | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Art is central to protest in Madison. Here's how its mediums have changed campus From the Vietnam War to pro-Palestine encampments, art as a form of protest and political expression has long been central to UW-Madison’s history. By Annika Bereny October 24, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In June of 1991, two members of LGBTQ+ rights organization Act Up! Madison put on diapers, bibs and frilly bonnets. They were protesting the denial of day care services to an HIV-positive mother in Madison, and though their method was uncommon, it garnered attention through art. Madison is known for its extensive history of protest. But art and different forms of self-expression have been central to both social life and protest at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Many look back on protests during the Civil Rights and anti-war movement in the 1960s and 1970s and characterize them as just chants, marches or the occasional sit-in. But there was also creation — from graffiti, music, paintings, performances, poems and more, artivism has become central to UW-Madison. As the Elvehjem building was constructed in 1966, soon to become the Chazen Museum of Art, a plywood fence around it became filled with political graffiti and street art. Messages such as “Where is Lee Harvey Oswald now that we really need him?” were commonplace on the fence, alongside “Lock up McNamara, throw away Ky,” a reference to the secretary of defense and South Vietnamese prime minister. At its inception, the Chazen had already hosted UW-Madison’s protest art. “Art has been used as a political device, protest or otherwise, for propaganda or for conveying an agenda of some sort,” Katherine Alcauskas, the chief curator of the Chazen, told The Daily Cardinal. “In fine art and in poster production, there's a lot of ways that images can tell very meaningful stories.” Artwork, whether intended to be political or not, is often adopted by a political cause, she continued. Amid the anti-war movement of the 1960s, UW-Madison students and faculty channeled anger toward police brutality through art. Warrington Colescott, professor emeritus of printmaking and painting at UW-Madison, created a piece in 1969 called “Out of a Garden Window” while teaching. Colescott depicts a protester being beaten and arrested by police, with other protesters being corralled away and an audience forming in front of their suburban houses. It is thought to be directly inspired by the anti-Vietnam war protests on campus. This piece appeared as part of a 2018 exhibit “Print in Protest” at the Chazen, highlighting the role of UW-Madison’s printmaking department in the school’s history of protest. Decades later, during the Black Lives Matter protests in the summer of 2020, murals in Madison and nationwide commemorated victims of police brutality and called for change. Both officially commissioned murals from the city of Madison and solo graffiti were found on walls and boarded up windows all across town. Colescott’s piece reflects both the attitudes of yesterday as well as today. His art is timeless, demonstrating the longevity of anti-police brutality action and activism Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Aside from visual art, protest can also be created for the other senses, such as music and spoken word. In Madison, the Forward! Marching Band, founded during the Act 10 protests, spent weeks playing around the Capitol in protest. Since then, the group has “dedicated itself to maintaining that unique fighting spirit of the Wisconsin protest movement.” During the #TheRealUW movement in 2016, UW students, alumni and faculty of color rebuked the racism they had been subjected to while students at UW-Madison, a one-day-only exhibit was held at the Chazen called “Unhood Yourself: The Real UW.” “It will be impossible to ignore the energy and passion that each of the artists bring to the Chazen,” the exhibit’s press release read. “Here, they will live in expression and present the truth. Without veils, without anonymity, unhooded.” In addition to spoken word performances, this exhibit included photography and collages from students who led the movement online, meant to “engulf” students in the day-to-day experience of their classmates of color. Recently, specific iconography and phrases, often in support of the pro-Palestine movement, on protest banners have become subject to confiscation by law enforcement officials. And, with the recent implementation of UW-Madison’s “expressive activity” policy, protest art may be in danger, at least while 25 feet from a campus building. Yet, some fight to keep this tradition alive. The Division of Arts administers an artivism grant for students who demonstrate an interest in activism through art. In the 2022-2023 school year, the grant funded 12 projects using a total of $12,400 and plans to reopen applications for the current school year later in the semester. Student publication the Madison Journal of Literary Criticism has been a recipient of this grant multiple times. Editor-in-Chief Landis Varughese told The Daily Cardinal the effects of artivism, including the experiences and art of Palestinians during Israel’s ongoing war in Gaza, is crucial to social change. “[Art] makes entry points to activism much more accessible because people may not be really inclined to read dense theory about political activism,” Varughese said. “For people who are halfway around the world, who may not be able to fully comprehend [the Palestinians’] strife firsthand, the way that they can be able to have a glimpse into their world for even just for a second through art is really powerful. And it's able to show us that we aren't so distant, after all.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Katie Schiedt | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS ‘I’m safe and secure’: Missing Wisconsin man who faked his death found in Eastern Europe Watertown man Ryan Borgwardt confirmed he’s alive in Europe and talking to investigators but still unsure if he will return home, Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll said Thursday. By Jake Piper November 23, 2024 | 2:00am CST Ryan Borgwardt, the Watertown man who authorities believed faked his own death, has been communicating with investigators “almost daily” from Eastern Europe since Nov. 11, Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll said on Nov. 21. Investigators initially presumed Borgwardt dead after they discovered his overturned kayak in the heart of Green Lake. After 54 days of searching, investigators discovered Borgwardt had taken out a life insurance policy, made inquiries about moving funds to foreign bank accounts and obtained a new passport. Investigators hosted a press conference Nov. 8 in which they detailed the newly discovered evidence, along with their hypothesis that Borgwardt was still alive and in Eastern Europe. In the days following the press conference, Podoll said his team did a “blitz” of the phone numbers and emails they obtained from Borgwardt’s computer. After making contact with a “female who spoke Russian,” Podoll said the woman put Borgwardt in contact with authorities. “I’m safe and secure, no problem,” Borgwardt said in a video from an unknown location dated Nov. 11, shown at a Thursday press conference. Borgwardt told authorities that after dumping his phone and kayak in Green Lake, he rode a “child-sized inflatable boat” back to shore before riding an e-bike nearly 70 miles to Madison, where he boarded a Greyhound bus to Detroit. From there, investigators said he rode a bus to Canada and then flew out of the country. Borgwardt revealed that he fled the country for “personal matters” and “thought this was the right thing to do,” taking out a new $375,000 life insurance plan “for his family.” Borgwardt told investigators he chose Green Lake as the place to stage his death due to its status as the deepest natural lake in Wisconsin. Podoll said it “wasn’t in [Borgwardt’s] plan” to fake his own death but declined to comment on why he decided to, only saying Borgwardt didn’t leave the country out of fears for his personal safety. According to Podoll, he appeared to “express remorse” for “what he's put his family through the past several months,” along with the amount of man hours and money put into finding him. Borgwardt also said he didn’t anticipate investigators would search for him for “more than two weeks” in their initial investigation into his supposed death. Borgwardt has not made contact with his family in the 10 days since authorities first contacted him, according to officials. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email John Gross, Clinical Associate Professor of law at the University of Wisconsin-Madison told WMTV 15 News that while faking death is not a crime on its own, Borgwardt could be charged with an attempted fraudulent insurance claim, a Class I felony in Wisconsin. Other charges for Borgwardt are still up in the air, with Podoll saying the possibility of a local “obstructing charge,” federal charges and $35,000 to $40,000 in restitution payments await Borgwardt if he returns home. But Podoll told reporters that Borgwardt’s biggest concern about returning was how the community would react. Investigators said they were still working to bring Borgwardt back home. “Christmas is coming, and what better gift could he give his kids than to be there for Christmas with them,” Podoll said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Wisconsin football's head coach Luke Fickell at the first home game of the 2023 season. Photo by Evan Halpop | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Column: Fickell showed no improvement in year two. Is it time for the Badgers to move on? The Badgers are inconsistent and underperforming, does the problem run deeper than Luke Fickell? By Tomer Ronen November 27, 2024 | 5:10pm CST When Athletic Director Chris McIntosh and the Wisconsin Badgers announced Luke Fickell as their next head coach, there was optimism, pride and — with a 12-team college football playoff on the horizon — hope. But two years later, it would be hard to say they’ve made much progress even if they beat Minnesota on Friday. Paul Chryst, who led the Badgers to three New Year’s Six bowls in eight seasons, was fired from the head position following a 2-3 start to the 2022 season, on the heels of an embarrassing loss to Illinois at Camp Randall, and it was absolutely the right decision at the time. His replacement, interim head coach Jim Leonhard, led the team to a 4-3 record the rest of the way, but another home loss, this time to Minnesota, brought the Axe to his short-lived time as the face of the program. I’m not here to argue they should have stayed. The opportunity to hire the hotshot coach from Cincinnati was an opportunity the Badgers couldn’t pass up, but so far Fickell has seemed in over his head. Last week, Wisconsin was embarrassed at Memorial Stadium by a Nebraska team that hadn’t beaten them since the Bret Bielema era. Two weeks ago, the team suffered a loss full of excuses — including the firing of offensive coordinator Phil Longo — to the No. 1 team in the country. Before that, a disaster in Iowa City and a second half collapse against Penn State. TOGETHER, the losses mark the first four-game skid for the Badgers since 2008. A loss Friday would be the longest winless streak for the Badgers since 1991, Barry Alvarez’s second season as head coach. Pointing fingers So who’s to blame? At face value, it seems Fickell is throwing Longo, who led the Badgers to an underwhelming 97th national scoring and 102nd passing rankings through the first 10 games, under the bus. Fickell’s most stout defenders will offer him a mulligan, with injuries to quarterbacks Tanner Mordecai last year and Tyler Van Dyke this year unceremoniously thrusting Braedyn Locke into the starting role in the biggest spots. The Badgers have even shown the ability to compete. They led the Nittany Lions at halftime, and they were just a missed call away from taking down the mighty Ducks. But looking at the game as a whole makes it clear: the Badgers have been inconsistent, outplayed and outcoached by their opposition week after week. Ultimately, it comes down to Fickell. EVERYONE knows Fickell — who told fans he had just one goal “to play for a championship” at his introductory press conference — is the face of this program. His grit, toughness and history of success with Cincinnati made him feel like a perfect fit to carry on a Wisconsin legacy. Instead, he’s shifted it in the opposite direction. The Badgers have been at their best when they’ve had a clear identity: running the ball and playing good defense. Under Fickell’s command, they’ve fallen to the middle of the pack in both, 52nd and 64th, respectively. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email As football shifts to a quarterback’s game, the Badgers have tried to become a team that relies heavily on the spread formations and airing it out, something they unsuccessfully tried to ACHIEVE through Longo’s Air Raid offense. In 2022 under Chryst, the Badgers ranked 117th in passing attempts. Last year, they skyrocketed to 19th. With future NFL running back Braelon Allen still in the picture, rushing attempts dropped from 45th to 72nd. A clear shift in philosophy. On defense, Fickell’s side of the ball, the team has dropped from 17th in points allowed per game under Chryst in 2022 to 52nd this year and from 10th in yards allowed per game to a measly 39th. Shouldn’t you excel at your specialty? Maybe we’ve set expectations too high. Winning in what is now a “Power Two conference” is difficult, and past Badgers teams were consistently able to overperform, courtesy of the now defunct Big Ten West division. Maybe fans need to tone it down a little. Maybe home against Northwestern really is a tough matchup. South Dakota is an FCS school, but they were ranked No. 6 after all, so it’s a quality win! We might need to take off those rose-colored glasses because the schedules don’t get easier from here. What’s next? With Wisconsin on the hook for $40 million if Fickell is fired at the end of the season — a number likely out of McIntosh’s budget — getting rid of him is likely off the table for now. Instead, the expensive head coach will seek a new front man on the offensive side of the ball when the season draws to a close, despite his insistence that he doesn’t think “it really is important as to who is calling [the offense].” Whoever the Badgers hire for their offensive coordinator spot will signify the direction the organization is headed. A run-the-rock, three-yards-and-a-cloud-of-dust signing will signify the return to ways of old. A progressive, air-it-out, spread-offense addition will show a return to the Longo style of play, leaving fans hoping to squeeze out its full potential. On the other side of the ball, Fickell will have to do better. Two Rivals four-star defensive backs from the 2024 class should see increased playing time in their sophomore years, and a spread of three-star players with an extra year under their belt will look to help push the Badgers to the next level. But for Badgers fans, a glance at the 2025 schedule likely elicits a sigh. Wisconsin is scheduled to head to Tuscaloosa to face Alabama before heading into a Big Ten schedule that includes trips to Indiana, Michigan and Oregon and play host to Ohio State at Camp Randall. But it’s MORE than just gloom and doom for the team in cardinal and white. Fickell has recruited well on paper, with 2024 and 2025 recruiting classes ranked in the top 20 by Rivals. And the Badgers have hope under center, with four-star Florida recruit quarterback Carter Smith — whose classification as a “dual-threat” quarterback has fans reminiscing about Russell Wilson — announcing his commitment to the 2025 class earlier this week. With teams like Indiana, Colorado and Arizona State turning things around in the blink of an eye, it’s fair for Badger fans to have hope. And with revenue sharing on the horizon, the landscape of college football will once again see a massive shift. But leaving fans optimistic about teenagers who may not touch the field for another two or three years only works if the Badgers can pull it together, and a potential end to the famed 22-year bowl game streak already has them antsy. Fickell will need his T.E.A.M. to exceed expectations to make it out of 2025 unscathed. Perhaps fans need to temper theirs. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80
Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S HOCKEY Wisconsin men’s hockey keeps unbeaten streak alive in season’s first home sweep Wisconsin triumphs over Alaska Anchorage 7-1 on Friday and 2-1 in a shootout on Saturday. By Abigail Bures December 3, 2024 | 12:51pm CST The Wisconsin men’s hockey team’s (5-8-1) energy built on the first sweep of the season against Penn State carried them through their bye week and into the Thanksgiving weekend series against Alaska Anchorage (2-10-2). Coming off a rough start to the season, junior forward Kyle Kukkonen noted the team has been working on closing out games strong. “I take pride in doing the little things and working together…It’s kind of a thing that we preach throughout the week,” Kukkonen said. “Do your job and do little things, and that leads to controlling games and learning how to win games.” Wisconsin triumphs over Seawolves in 7-1 win Wisconsin beat Alaska Anchorage 7-1 in their highest-scoring game of the season so far on Friday night at the Kohl Center. Kukkonen, a transfer out of Michigan Tech, and freshman forward Gavin Morrissey both scored two goals and together assisted on three other goals that night to make strides in their first season as Badgers. Ryland Mosley kicked off the game for the Badgers with an even-strength goal and only three minutes, 56 seconds on the clock. Morrissey started the play from behind the net and brought the puck up to the corner where he traded places with sophomore forward Quinn Finley. A pass from Finley was then dumped to Mosley, who had great positioning directly in front of the net and finished it off for the Badgers. Kukkonen made his third goal of the season on a penalty shot. The junior forward advanced on the Seawolves’ goaltender Greg Orosz from the left side before attacking the right side of the goal. With these two opportunities and a strong defense, the Badgers ended the first period leading 2-0. Finley scored first in the second period after a blocked shot on goal was rebounded his way for Wisconsin’s first — but not last — score of the night on a power play. Shortly after, Wisconsin forward Jack Horbach received a five-minute major penalty for hitting from behind, but the Badgers ran the clock down and maintained their 3-0 lead with only four players on the ice. Morrissey followed in Finley’s footsteps and scored the second power-play goal of the night for Wisconsin. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “He brings it every day,” head coach Mike Hastings said of Morrissey's consistency this season. “The game rewards you when you put the work in consistently.” Just three minutes later, Morrissey scored the next goal with Mosely on the assist. The freshman has four goals and 11 assists so far this season. “I’ve got two great players on my line, and finding chemistry with those guys has been big for me,” Morrissey said. “That’s why me and those guys have been ready to go and I think have still done pretty well for the start of the season.” In the second period, Wisconsin scored one goal and Alaska the other, leaving the game 5-1 with Wisconsin ahead at the end of the period. Kukkonen fired the puck just past the glove of Orosz and into the top right corner of the net off a deflected shot from junior forward Christian Fitzgerald. 26 seconds later, the Seawolves made their first and only goal of the night with an even-strength goal by freshman forward Dylan Contreras. But that single goal wasn’t enough for a Seawolves comeback. During a quiet third period, only one goal, made by Wisconsin graduate student forward Cody Laskosky, was scored, ending the game 7-1 for Wisconsin. A narrow game two The Badgers managed to win narrowly in an overtime game that ended in a shootout on Saturday night featuring a Badgers Beyond Borders event. Wisconsin goaltender Tommy Scarfone held the net for the Badgers Saturday night, looking to hold the Seawolves as well as he did on Friday. Alaska Anchorage mixed up their roster and replaced Orosz with freshman goaltender Tyler Krivtsov. A power-play goal by Alaska Anchorage freshman forward Ryan Johnson held Wisconsin 0-1 from the end of the second period until almost the end of the third. With a minute and a half left on the clock in the third, Wisconsin pulled Scarfone to put six men on the ice in an attempt to tie the game. It paid off as Mosley sunk a goal with only 19 seconds of game time left. Wisconsin remained offensively strong for much of the first overtime period. The Badgers had 10 shots compared to the Seawolves’ one. Two shootout goals from Wisconsin’s Finley and Mosley won the competition for the Badgers. Anchorage had three attempted shootout goals, with only senior forward Maximilion Helgeson scoring on Scarfone. Anchorage served eight minutes of penalties during this game, but Wisconsin wasn’t able to capitalize on any of them, putting its’ goals-opportunities for power plays this season at 11-52. Four-game win streak The Badgers fought back against their losing record in this series and now have four-game unbeaten run. Two Wisconsin players, Ryland Mosley and Gavin Morrissey, had a four-point game Friday night, the first for a Badger since Finley in January. Kukkonen’s penalty goal was the first opportunity Wisconsin had at a penalty shot since Finley's against Ohio State last season. “I thought we kept playing offense,” Hastings said in a post-game press conference. “We possessed the puck, we made some plays, but we didn’t do it in areas to kick Alaska into transition.” Saturday night marked higher point streaks for both Finley and Mosley. Beginning during the Minnesota game on Nov. 8, Finley has a career-high six-game point streak with four goals and seven assists. Mosley is on a five-game point streak with five goals and four assists. Captain Owen Lindmark said he was proud of his success during faceoffs on Saturday. With a game record of 22-27, Lindmark had the most opportunities of any Badger that night in the circles. “I just try to take ownership in the faceoff circle,” Lindmark said. “Being in my sixth year here, I think that that’s probably the strongest area of my game, and I take a lot of pride in any chance I can get to help the team out. That was in the faceoff circle tonight.” After 14 games, Wisconsin’s record is now 5-8-1. Up next: Wisconsin plays their final home games of the fall semester on Dec. 6 and Dec. 7 against No. 1 Michigan State. The annual UW Teddy Toss will happen during Friday night’s game. Fans can bring teddy bears and donate them to Toy For Tots during the Teddy Toss. Friday night is also Winter Wonderland-themed, and fans are encouraged to wear holiday apparel. Saturday night honors former Badger Joe Pavelski, who recently retired after 18 years in the NHL. Pavelski played for Badgers from 2004 to 2006 and was drafted to the San Jose Sharks, where he played for 13 years and served four of those as captain. At Wisconsin, Pavelski was part of the championship team in 2006 and scored 101 points, the ninth Badger to score over 100 points during their first two seasons. The puck drops at 7 p.m. both nights. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Jeff Miller/UW-Madison Photo by Jeff Miller | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS State commission rules UW Health not legally required to recognize nurses union The decision leaves UW Health's ability to recognize the nurses union in legal limbo. By Zoe Kukla December 2, 2022 | 2:00am CST The Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission (WERC) ruled on Nov. 25 that UW Health hospital is not legally required to recognize or negotiate a contract with the recently created nurses union, UW Nurses United, or negotiate contracts. The WERC’s ruling found UW Health was not subject to the Wisconsin Peace Act under Act 10, meaning it is up to UW Health to determine whether they will recognize and broker a contract with the nurses union. Act 10, passed in 2011 under former Republican Gov. Scott Walker, restricted most unions and collective bargaining rights for public workers and sparked months of protests upon its passing. UW Nurses United and the UW hospital previously agreed in September to let the WERC judge the union's legality in exchange for no strikes and monthly meetings between nurses and the hospitals. UW Health nurses Mary Jorgensen, Colin Gillis and Sarah Langland dissented from the WERC’s decision in a statement issued last week. "The opinion by the Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission (WERC) does not impact our union membership or the Meet and Discuss process at UW Health,” the nurses said. “While we respect WERC, we do not agree with its opinion that UW Health nurses are excluded from the Employment Peace Act." UW Nurses plan to appeal the commission's decision through state courts and petition for a union election with the National Labor Relations Board, according to their statement. UW Health may be able to voluntarily recognize the nurses union even if they are not legally required to recognize it, according to a formal opinion released by Attorney General Josh Kaul in June. However, UW Health plans to petition the Wisconsin Supreme Court for legal clarity on the issue, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Senate Minority Leader Melissa Agard (D-Madison) voiced her support for the nurses and expressed disappointment in the WERC’s decision in a statement Monday. "While the decision by WERC is disappointing, it is not surprising,” Agard said. “More importantly, WERC's decision does not change the September agreement between nurses and the administration." UW Health nurses, management, Gov. Tony Evers and Service Employees International Union Healthcare Wisconsin (SEIU) reached a historic agreement in September to jointly address UW nurses’ concerns and create a path towards quality patient care and nurse retention at UW hospitals. While the agreement did not officially recognize the Nurses Union, it offered hope for better relations between the nurses and UW Health executives for the first time since a previous nurses union contract expired in 2014. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email An estimated 2,600 nurses of UW Nurses United remained unified to find a collective bargaining solution despite last week’s legal setback. "UW nurses are at the forefront of a national movement of working people – Black, brown, AAPI, white and indigenous – who are organizing across race, place and industry,” UW Nurses United said in a statement. “We are continuing to build our union and work collectively with the administration to ensure UW Health is the best place to work and receive care." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Zoe KuklaZoe Kukla is the special pages editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the graphics editor, a photographer and is a senior staff writer who reported for state news. Follow her on Twitter at @ZoeKukla. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Big Read Books author Rebekah Taussig's gives her keynote address on "Sitting Pretty: The View from My Ordinary Resilient Disabled Body" on October 16, 2024. Photo by Emma Schieffer | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Conversations around disability reigned as Go Big Read author visited campus. Students hope it can stay this way Rebekah Taussig visited the University of Wisconsin-Madison for discussions on disability in classrooms, panels and in her keynote speech as part of the Go Big Read curriculum. By Bryna Goeking October 18, 2024 | 4:25pm CDT Dr. Rebekah Taussig, author of this year’s Go Big Read book “Sitting Pretty: The View from My Ordinary Resilient Disabled Body,” visited the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus for guided discussions about her story and experiences as a disabled person. At the keynote speech Wednesday night, Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin said the book has been integrated into 40 courses, with 9,000 copies distributed across campus. Taussig was emotional seeing the overfilled crowd, many of whom shared they had read her book. “I’m having kind of a surreal moment,” she said. “I’m just pausing over this and seeing your faces, and just want to thank you. It feels really big to me.” Taussig and Mnookin discussed the book and its larger connections to experiences surrounding disability. As a child in rural Kansas, Taussig said her experience in a wheelchair left her feeling like a “class pet” rather than a person. She recounted arriving on the bus for disabled students in elementary school and having her first stark experience with feeling othered. She talked about writing her book, specifically the uncomfortable chapters about her first time teaching about disability — an experience she recalled as like “jumping into an ice cold pool.” But these experiences of learning how to connect disability to others helped her frame how she wrote her book. “So many people are connected to this conversation from so many directions and in a way that I can’t anticipate, but I know how to anticipate you will be connected in some way,” Taussig said. Taussig will publish “We Are the Scrappy Ones” in April 2025, a children’s book celebrating children with disabilities. Disabled community unites on campus Disabled UW-Madison students, faculty and staff joined Taussig for a panel discussion on disability on campus Tuesday night. Students shared issues with housing, receiving accommodations and social issues caused by disability, thanking Taussig for helping to normalize these issues. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One panelist, student Brelynn Bille, mentioned the book chapter about dating as a disabled person. “It felt like I was the person that you wrote it for,” she said. “It’s exactly why we need more books on this and sharing that perspective because it helps to remove that otheringness.” At Wednesday’s address, one audience member, a sophomore in high school who is disabled, thanked Taussig for sharing her “complications of kindness” and said it helped her understand her own self-advocacy. Many times, Taussig echoed the importance of stories in understanding frameworks of oppression and change. “I am rather biased, but I do believe that stories are the way to change people’s thinking the most deeply and directly, in the most lasting ways,” she said. A ‘filtered’ experience One audience member asked Taussig about her experience navigating UW-Madison’s campus in a wheelchair Wednesday night. Taussig said her experience was “filtered,” with Go Big Read officials ensuring that all paths and elevators would be accessible. At Tuesday’s panel, students shared this isn’t always the case. One student, Emmett Lockwood, said they had lived in a building on campus where the elevator company had been out of business for 30 years, causing a delay in repair parts. Mnookin echoed this sentiment, noting that her husband works on the third floor of a building on campus without an elevator. She said that adding an elevator to this building would require a complete transformation, something the state Legislature and donors have not focused on. Panelist Brelynn Bille said UW-Madison “seems content with merely meeting the bare minimum [accessibility] requirements,” in an Instagram post. In the post, she shared that although Mnookin had previously told Bille that “she needs to hear these issues directly to advocate for them,” the chancellor was not present at the disabled students panel, which Bille called a “contradiction” and “disheartening.” At both the keynote address and disability panel, Taussig emphasized that disability advocacy does not end when she leaves, and lasting, oftentimes slow, change is needed to make institutional changes. “I get to come into these communities and these spaces where people have just read the book, and everybody's excited, and we're planning events around it, and then what happened?” Taussig said. “What do we do with the things that we learned?” “So I think part of it is thinking about how we can carry the things that we practice now in the future,” she said. “I think it's learning to do more of that and not just do it this one time.” A self-proclaimed lover of stories, Taussig asked the question: “what are the other books?” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
A landscape photographed at Blackfeet Indian Reservation in Montana, which could be used for solar or wind farms. Courtesy of Haley Rains SCIENCE Native Americans on reservations struggle with economic growth. Green energy could be a solution The potential of green energy on Native American reservations is left unrealized by stringent regulations, hindering growth, according to UW-Madison researchers. By Joseph Panzer October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Native Americans living on reservations continually face a poverty rate nearly double the national average of all races and ongoing business obstacles that hinder economic growth. The U.S. government pushed Native Americans onto reservation land in 1820-50. Indigenous groups were deprived of natural resources like oil and gold that could be used to build capital. A recent study by University of Wisconsin-Madison professors Dominic Parker and Sarah Johnston found that extracting energy from renewable sources like the sun or the wind with little environmental impact could be the force that changes this long standing problem. European settlers pushed Indigenous people onto poor farmland when creating reservations, which tends to be windier, more arid and more suited for modern wind and solar energy, the Nature Energy study said. Green energy accounted for 6% of U.S. GDP growth in 2023 and has employed more people than the fossil fuel industry since 2021, according to an analysis by the International Energy Agency. Still, the road to developing these resources for Native American tribes is fraught with difficulty. To drill oil on Native American land requires 49 permitting steps, and the approval process can take over three years due to intense federal regulations governing tribes. By contrast, developing oil on state land only requires four permitting steps and typically takes three months. And developing a plan for solar or wind power generation on tribal lands requires both a coordination of internal power with the federal government. This poses a particular challenge for tribal companies who, due to federal policies that have divided tribal land into hundreds of parcels, must get approval from each of the parcels’ owners before starting an energy project. “This regulatory jumble makes energy projects almost as uncommon as where they are forbidden, such as in public parks, forests and wildlife refuges,” Parker told UW-Madison. The Inflation Reduction Act allocated $14 billion in subsidies and incentives for developing wind and solar power on tribal lands before 2026, but those incentives are often locked behind the condition that tribes connect to a regional electrical grid. For many tribes, this process is time-consuming and requires legal resources that they do not possess. The U.S. Department of Energy has issued resource guides for Native American communities, emphasizing that they wish to respect tribal sovereignty when issuing resources for energy development on tribal lands. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Magnanimo powers Badgers to another weekend series win The Badgers hosted the Fighting Illini for three games over Saturday and Sunday, winning the first and last. By Justin Alpert April 3, 2023 | 4:22pm CDT Wisconsin Badgers softball (17-10, 4-2) celebrated their 2023 home opener by winning two out of three versus Illinois (22-14, 1-5) at the Goodman Diamond this weekend. Coach Yvette Healy continued to surprise with her pitching usage, leaning almost exclusively on Tessa Magnanimo in the three-game set. The senior’s performance tailed off as the weekend progressed, but she and the Badger offense did enough to secure another pair of Big Ten wins. Friday | 6-2 W Magnanimo yielded two runs on three hits before recording an out in the first inning. Wisconsin’s Kayla Konwent responded with her seventh home run of the season, a remarkable two-run blast on an eye-level fastball. Ellie Hubbard’s first career home run gave the Badgers a 3-2 lead in the fourth. Wisconsin added another three runs in the fifth on Brooke Kuffel’s two-run single and an RBI double to left-center by Hubbard. The sophomore shortstop has not only emerged as a capable hitter — she’s now slugging to all parts of the field and providing a massive boost to the bottom half of the lineup. Magnanimo (W, 2-1) hardly broke a sweat after the first inning. She proceeded to throw six more innings with two hits, no walks and nine strikeouts for a 105-pitch complete game. Illinois had four plate appearances with a runner in scoring position from the second inning on, and each ended in a strikeout. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Sunday | 6-4 L Wisconsin reversed the trend of early deficits by taking a 3-0 lead in the first three innings. Catcher Christaana Angelopulos ran the squeeze play to perfection in the second, dropping down a well-placed bunt to drive in Peyton Bannon. Molly Schlosser followed with a sacrifice fly before Hubbard added an RBI single in the third. Magnanimo returned to the circle and picked up right where she left off, striking out five Fighting Illini through three perfect frames. Things unraveled in the fourth, however, as Illinois tallied two runs on a pair of singles, a double and a triple. Kailee Powell’s leadoff home run in the fifth ended Magnanimo’s outing at 62 pitches. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Maddie Schwartz (L, 5-7) entered and got through the fifth before allowing three unearned runs in the sixth, with Rylie Crane’s one-out error allowing Illinois to take a three-run lead. As they have all season, a Wisconsin error opened the door for a game-changing inning. Gabi Salo got the last four outs of the game for Wisconsin. Angelopulos brought the Badgers within two on her first home run of the season, but it wasn’t enough. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Sunday | 10-9 W The 20-plus mph winds blowing toward the outfield made Sunday afternoon miserable for pitchers on both sides. Magnanimo, who interestingly got the nod for a third straight game, allowed a solo shot in the first inning. Wisconsin then chased Illinois starter Lauren Wiles before she even recorded an out. Hubbard, elevated to the two-hole, hit a two-run home run after Katie Keller drew a leadoff walk. Kuffel then homered to make it 4-1. Another Kuffel home run made it 9-1 Badgers in the second inning, but Illinois began chipping away at the massive deficit. Through five frames it was suddenly 10-9 Wisconsin, and Magnanimo inexplicably remained in the game. She got through the sixth and seventh unscathed, though, capping off her second complete game of the weekend. Magnanimo (W, 3-1) allowed 13 hits and eight earned runs on 136 pitches. Schwartz and Salo had thrown 29 and 18 pitches, respectively, while Paytn Monticelli hadn’t appeared in a game all weekend. It’s unclear why Healy stuck with Magnanimo through her struggles and apparent fatigue, but it worked out in the end for Wisconsin. Between the two teams, the weekend finale featured 20 hits, 19 runs, six doubles, six hit-by-pitches, five home runs and a triple. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Promising power Six home runs in a three-game span is a refreshing sight for the Badgers. Konwent only hitting one of those, while Kuffel and Hubbard continued their breakout campaigns, is a testament to Wisconsin’s greatly improved offense in 2023. Kuffel now boasts a 1.057 OPS with four home runs and 14 RBI, and her .340 average ranks first among qualifying Badgers. Hubbard, meanwhile, is now hitting .294 with 11 RBI and a .400 on-base percentage. For context, the shortstop was hitting .195 after an 0-for-3 performance versus Texas on March 10, so her rise in both production and lineup placement has been rapid. Everyone who has earned a look near the top of the order — Hubbard, Kuffel and Skylar Sirdashney — has excelled. This is an excellent problem to have for Healy, who figures to continue shuffling the lineup as 2023 progresses. While Magnanimo’s usage — 303 pitches and 18 innings from Friday to Sunday — was puzzling, it should leave Wisconsin’s other three arms exceptionally well-rested heading into another week of games. The Badgers are scheduled to host St. Thomas in a Tuesday double-header, but forecasted rain and thunderstorms could lead to cancellation. Wisconsin then heads to Purdue for three weekend games against the struggling Boilermakers (17-19, 2-6). Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin wins Greenbrier Tip-Off, continues incredible start to the season With wins over UCF and Pitt, Wisconsin improves to 7-0 for the first time since the 2014-15 season. By Jacob Szczap November 27, 2024 | 5:06pm CST With two impressive victories over the University of Central Florida and the University of Pittsburgh last weekend, the Wisconsin men’s basketball team won the Greenbrier Tip-Off Tournament, starting their season 7-0, and continued to make a name for themselves in college basketball’s opening month. Entering the season with an unproven, new-look team, No. 15 Wisconsin was picked by national pundits to finish toward the end of the Big Ten. But as their torrid start to the season continues, Wisconsin's performance over the weekend in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia is their latest showing that proves they are a team that cannot be ignored. The Badgers beat UCF 86-70 on Friday and then defeated Pittsburgh 81-75 on Sunday to clinch the tournament championship. With their victory over Pittsburgh, Wisconsin is now the only team in the country with multiple wins over teams ranked in the KenPom Top 25. Led by guards John Tonje and John Blackwell, Wisconsin’s offense has continued to put impressive numbers on the board. Over the weekend, Tonje added to his incredible start to his Wisconsin career, taking home Tournament MVP honors after scoring 33 points and grabbing seven rebounds Sunday. Tonje scored 15 points along with six rebounds against UCF on Friday. With his performance Sunday, Tonje became the first player in the Big Ten this season to record multiple 30-point games. Tonje has reached double figures in every game this season for Wisconsin and has reached 15 points in all but one. He is now averaging 21.3 points per game, third in the Big Ten. Tonje delivered a heartfelt message after the game in an interview. “I just want my teammates to know that I’m here to build lifelong relationships, and I think they’ve embraced me and the city’s embraced me,” he said. “I’m just doing everything I can to compete for the name on the front of the jersey, and it’s been amazing so far.” Blackwell continued his hot start to his sophomore season, averaging 15.5 points, four rebounds and a steal over the weekend, earning All-Tournament Team honors. Forward Nolan Winter and guard Kamari McGee also had memorable weekends for the Badgers. Winter followed up a 13-point and 10-rebound double-double on Friday with an 11-point performance on Sunday, marking the first time in his career he has put up double figures consecutively. Meanwhile, with 14 points on Friday and 10 on Sunday, McGee posted his first back-to-back double-digit scoring games with Wisconsin. McGee played previously at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. McGee, now in his senior season, has emerged as an invaluable part of Wisconsin’s team. In the 23 games in which McGee has played at least 10 minutes, the Badgers are 20-3 and 16-0 dating back to last season. Head coach Greg Gard has emphasized the importance of offense in today’s era of college basketball, and seven games in, he has received contributions down his roster. Wisconsin’s victories over the weekend emphasized its ability to score and that they must be taken seriously as the Big Ten season approaches. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S SOCCER Women’s soccer heads to the NCAA Sweet 16 for the first time since 2021 Wisconsin beat Virginia 4-2 in penalty kicks, and will go on to face No.1 seed USC on Sunday. By Gabriella Hartlaub November 24, 2024 | 1:32pm CST The Wisconsin women’s soccer team beat the fourth seeded University of Virginia in penalty kicks on Friday to earn a spot in the the Sweet 16 of the 2024 NCAA Tournament for the first time since 2021. Despite logging no shots on goal, the Badgers took down Virginia in penalty kicks 4-2 after double overtime. In a game that will no doubt go down in program history as nothing short of miraculous, Wisconsin made every penalty kick that they attempted. Sophomore Ella Ottey made the final penalty kick to win the game. After 110 minutes of play, the score remained 0-0 due in no small part to Wisconsin goalkeeper Drew Stover, who had five saves for the game. It was Stover’s effort that saved the game for the Badgers as they struggled offensively against Virginia. If any of Virginia's five shots on goal went in, the Badgers’ season would’ve been done before overtime even started. It was also Stover who gave the Badgers the upper hand in the penalty kick shootout when she blocked Virginia's first shot attempt, which eventually led to Wisconsin’s win. Stover’s clean sheet was one of the only bright spots for a game in which the Badgers struggled offensively. Throughout the season, the Badgers have consistently outshot their opponents by large margins, but they struggled to get past the Virginia defense throughout the game, ending the game with six shots to Virginia's nine. For a team that has averaged 11.9 shots per game, to have only six shots is usually an insurmountable error, especially during tournament play. As the Badgers move on to face the No.1 seed USC, these kinds of errors will be certain death for the Badgers’ Elite Eight hopes. When Wisconsin and USC last met in September, the Badgers lost 0-3 in a game where they also had no shots on goal and USC had twice the amount of overall shots. While a victory in this game shows that miracles are possible, it will take nothing short of that to push the Badgers over USC and on to the Elite Eight. The Badgers play the Trojans Sunday Nov. 24 at 6 p.m. CST on ESPN+. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball opens spring season in Phoenix with a split double-header Following a resounding win against Weber State University in their opening game, the Badgers even out their season record to 1-1. By Abby Shulman February 14, 2024 | 1:32pm CST The Badgers played their first official game of the season in Phoenix, shutting out Weber State 8-0 in the Arizona Kajikawa Classic after their opening game in Tempe, Arizona was canceled. The Badgers started fast in their first-ever game against Weber State, taking a 1-0 lead after the first inning. Their hot start continued into the second with two more runs thanks to outfielder Molly Schlosser’s double to left field. The Badgers’ fielding supported their offense, allowing no errors and zero runners to cross home. Their offense continued to produce with three more runs in the fourth inning, then adding two more insurance runs in the fifth and final inning off hits from catchers Emmy Wells and Emily Bojan. With 11 total hits and no errors, the Badgers could not have started the season any better. Wisconsin continued their opening in Phoenix against Grand Canyon University, another school they had never played before, at GCU’s stadium before losing 5-2. The Badgers quickly fell behind in the first inning by a single run from GCU. However, Wisconsin took the lead 2-1 after outfielder Brooke Kuffel launched a homerun over the left field fence, making this the junior’s eighth homer of her career. GCU got ahead 5-2, but were then shut down after pitcher Tessa Magnanimo took over the mound from Shelby Jacobson in the fourth inning. The Badgers continued the Kajikawa Classic in Tempe on Feb. 10. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Kayla Northway | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin women’s basketball puts out the Flames 61-57 Women’s basketball wins in a nailbiter on Thursday night, junior Serah Williams surpasses 1000 career points. By Elizabeth Jacques November 26, 2024 | 1:39pm CST Wisconsin Badgers women’s basketball had a lot to celebrate after Thursday night’s game against the University of Illinois-Chicago Flames, coming out on top with a four-point victory, 61-57. Junior forward Serah Williams reached 1,000 career points in the Badgers’ win over the Flames. She is the 29th women’s basketball player to achieve this milestone and is the third fastest to do so, achieving it in only 66 games. Williams achieved her milestone in just the first quarter, but she just kept on going. She was the leading scorer of the night, dropping 20 points, to bring her career point total to 1,016. Williams also grabbed 14 rebounds, collecting the 25th double-double of her career. Sophomore center Carter McCray and graduate student guard Natalie Leuzinger helped Williams out with 10 points apiece. The game was a gritty one from both sides. In the first quarter, the teams combined for 21 points, Wisconsin leading 12-9. The Badgers forced three shot clock violations and held the Flames to a low shooting percentage. In the second quarter, it was all Badgers. They were able to keep the Flames to only scoring seven second-quarter points. This number is tied for the 10th fewest in Badgers program history. At the half, the Badgers led 25-16. After the half, it started to light up for both teams. The Badgers, thanks to rebounding, were able to keep their composure. In the fourth quarter, the Badgers led 35-31 in rebounding, which helped them pull away from this game entirely. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball sits at .500 after the Mary Nutter Collegiate Classic The Wisconsin Badgers softball team won four of their six games in Cathedral City, California, improving their record from 4-6 to 8-8. By Abby Shulman February 25, 2024 | 9:59pm CST With two split doubleheaders and one fully successful doubleheader in California at the Mary Nutter Collegiate Classic, the Wisconsin Badgers softball team improved their record to 8-8 by the end of their West Coast trip. The Badgers broke their losing streak with a close, low-scoring game against the Oregon State Beavers on Thursday, winning 3-2. Starting off trailing but stealing the win in the seventh, Wisconsin reversed their start-strong-then-trail-behind routine from the last tournament. While Wisconsin failed to score in the first three innings — no thanks to a series of fly outs and strikeouts — the Beavers solo homered in the first and scored again in the second due to a sequence of walks from Gabi Salo. The Badgers cleaned up their game shortly after getting a run back in the fourth when catcher Emmy Wells, infielder Ellie Hubbard and catcher Emily Bojan all singled, followed by a ground out from infielder Ava Kuszak. Their deficit was split in half with a score of 1-2. While the Beavers had a dry rest of the game, the Badgers took the lead after trailing throughout the game. Infielder Alivia Bark scored off of OSU’s error, and just as the Badgers have thrived off of homeruns this season, outfielder Peyton Bannon blasted the ball over the left field fence to take the lead. The Badgers ended up splitting the doubleheader in another close, low-scoring game, losing in the seventh 2-3 to the No. 11 Missouri Tigers. After a Tiger scored off of Tessa Magnanimo’s wild pitch, Magnanimo locked in to ensure no hits came throughout the next five frames. After an unlit few innings, Kuszak crushed her first homerun of the year, tying the game 1-1 in the fifth. The Badgers filled the bases during the sixth, but the Tigers escaped with a strikeout. Finally, Magnanimo was forced out of the game in the top of the seventh when Mizzou scored a single, leading 2-1. Shelby Jackson’s wild pitch run led to an insurance run for the Tigers. The Badgers got one run back from Bannon in the bottom of the seventh but fell short of a victory after a strikeout. Badgers notch another split double-header on Friday The Badgers prevailed in a series of shutouts at the beginning of the season, and they stole that groove back with a shutout Friday against the San Diego Toreros, winning 8-0. The Badgers had control of the whole game, with Wells establishing the team’s dominance in the second with a solo homer, her fourth home run of the season. The Badgers only struck out twice throughout the game, with their highest scoring frame coming from three runs in the fifth from infielder Danielle Lucey, Kuszak and outfielder Marytherese Nevin. Salo thrived throughout the entire runaway victory, only allowing two hits while striking out seven. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Badgers lost 2-10 in the five-inning second game of the day to the No. 1 Oklahoma Sooners, who came in with a 63-game winning streak. Pitcher Shelby Jacobson started strong in the first but fell in the second, giving the Sooners a 2-0 lead. The Badgers caught up in the next couple of innings, tying the game 2-2 with RBIs from Bark and catcher Hilary Blomberg. Jacobson threw another clean frame during the bottom of the third. The Badgers kept up with the Sooners until things fell apart in the bottom of the fourth. Magnanimo took over but allowed eight runs, cut short by the run rule. With an uneventful final inning, the Badgers lost 2-10. Badgers triumph Saturday in a shutout followed by a win against a ranked team The Badgers started off their Saturday doubleheader with a 4-0 win against the Long Beach State Sharks, their sixth shutout of the season. Wisconsin carried off the lead 2-0 in the second, with RBIs from Hubbard and Bojan, followed by an RBI from Bark in the third — her eleventh RBI of the season. Bark drove in the Badger’s last run of the game in the fifth, while Jacobson secured no runs from the Sharks. Wisconsin allowed the Sharks just one hit all game. The Badgers closed the Mary Nutter Classic with their first win against a ranked team and their second win of the day, beating the No. 20 Utah Utes 4-2. For the first four innings, the only run scored was from Utah in the second thanks to multiple singles off of Magnanimo. Both teams scored one run in the fifth, with outfielder Bree Mitchell scoring for the Badgers to push the score to 1-2. Wisconsin recovered and took charge in the sixth, scoring three runs. Wisconsin won 4-2 after an RBI from Blomberg, a remarkable two-run homer from pinch-hitter Fiona Girardot and a clean frame for Magnanimo in the seventh. After a rollercoaster of a tournament in California, Wisconsin sits at .500. They will take the field again at the Utah Tech Invitational on March 1-3 in St. George, Utah, which will include a three-game series rematch against the Utes. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Jonathan Mintz | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup The Wisconsin men’s basketball team was plagued by turnovers and couldn’t contain Marquette star Kam Jones. By Jacob Szczap December 11, 2024 | 10:17am CST The No. 11 Wisconsin Badgers men’s basketball team entered Fiserv Forum on Saturday with the goal of keeping their three-game winning streak over their in-state rival, the No. 5 Marquette Golden Eagles. But they were unable to contain Marquette star Kam Jones and his pesky cast of supporting scorers. The Badgers head back to Madison having relinquished their in-state bragging rights, falling 88-74 in front of a packed arena. Wisconsin, now 8-2 (0-1 Big Ten), stayed afloat in a back-and-forth first half but couldn’t right the ship after receiving a second-half sucker punch from the country’s fifth-ranked team. In Marquette’s second-half domination, the Shaka Smart-led Golden Eagles left little room for doubt in determining the state’s best team, for now. On an afternoon in which Wisconsin had to play smart, sound basketball, the Badgers uncharacteristically turned the ball over 16 times. Marquette’s intense defense put pressure on Wisconsin, consistently turning Badger miscues into Golden Eagle points. Jones gave Wisconsin’s defense the most trouble, casually collecting 32 points in a variety of facets. The 6-foot-4 senior shot 12-21 from the field and 3-7 from three, getting to the lane, floating mid-range runners and hitting threes. Jones did this all while finding open teammates, good enough for six assists. “He’s strong, he’s physical, he’s mature,” Wisconsin head coach Greg Gard said about Jones after the game. “But I think the biggest thing is just what’s between his ears, the mental part of it, that he lets the game come to him and doesn’t try and force it.” Smart, Marquette’s head coach, offered a much more blunt synopsis of his star. “In my opinion, he’s the best guard in the country,” he said. Along with Jones’ outburst, Marquette received 13 points from senior forward David Joplin and 12 apiece from guards Stevie Mitchell and Chase Ross, while forward Ben Gold added nine. Meanwhile, Wisconsin guard Max Klesmit led the Badgers in scoring, contributing 22 points. Klesmit found confidence early, hitting two threes in the game's opening minutes before finishing 6-11 from beyond the arc and 6-12 overall. After a quiet first half, guard John Blackwell finished with 17 points on 7-11 shooting, with three rebounds and three assists. The other guard, John Tonje, added 14 points on 3-11 shooting, while grabbing six rebounds. In a first half where neither team pulled away, Tonje led Wisconsin with 12 points followed by Klesmit, who scored 11. Facing a tough Marquette defense, Tonje used his knack to get to the free-throw line and drove fiercely at Golden Eagle defenders to draw fouls. Seven of his first-half points came at the line. In the midst of a first-half chess match, the Badgers also received a boost from forward Carter Gilmore, who scored three points, grabbed six rebounds and dished out a career-high four assists. In a scrappy game, Gilmore provided the spark needed to duel with Marquette. Wisconsin led 39-37 at halftime, but in the second half, the Badgers couldn’t keep the air in the tires that kept them moving in the first half. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email After Tonje picked up his third foul and was forced out of the game with 17:23 left, Marquette took immediate advantage of Wisconsin playing without its primary points generator, putting the Badgers on their heels and flipping the game. The Golden Eagles went on a quick 7-2 run, turning up the pressure, forcing Gard to call a timeout. Suddenly, Marquette’s home crowd came fully alive. Next, as Marquette took all momentum, Wisconsin was faced with the challenges of containing a heating-up Golden Eagle offense and scoring against their suffocating, high-energy defense. In return, they turned over the ball seven times in 14 possessions, putting the game squarely in control of Marquette. The turnovers, Gard said, “created an avalanche of us getting in transition defensively.” “They took advantage of that, were able to get to the rim, and then got confidence going from that,” Gard said. “And then we were playing on our heels for the rest of the second half after that.” Over this stretch, the game shifted from a 45-44 Wisconsin advantage to a 61-53 Marquette lead. From there, the Marquette onslaught continued, and even as Wisconsin stayed within striking distance, a Badgers comeback never seemed realistic. After a trying week, Wisconsin is now the loser of two games in a row. In the midst of enduring the up-and-down nature of a college basketball season, the Badgers will get right back on the horse with a conference showdown at Illinois on Tuesday. “After this week, the ending message is we don’t have time to feel sorry for ourselves,” Gard said. “We gotta get better and turn around and play in two days again in Illinois.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Colin Farrell in Max's "The Penguin." Photo courtesy of Macall Polay/HBO. ARTS The Penguin is horrible. That’s what makes ‘The Penguin’ amazing Lauren LeFranc’s spinoff of Matt Reeves’ 2022 film “The Batman” is one of the best shows of 2024. By Oliver Gerharz November 23, 2024 | 2:00am CST This review contains major spoilers for “The Batman” (2022) and minor spoilers for the earlier episodes of “The Penguin” (2024). For the last 40 years, the top hat-and-monocle-wearing Penguin has been swinging around his weaponized umbrella in bird-themed duels with Batman. Max’s 2024 miniseries “The Penguin” ditches these parts of the character to show a more revoltingly evil version than usual. The show, a TV spinoff/follow–up to Matt Reeves’ 2022 oscar-nominated superhero movie “The Batman,” recently finished its eight episode run. “The Penguin” quickly reintroduces its title character, a mobster named Oz Cobb (Colin Farrell) who waddles like a penguin because of an untreated foot deformity. The ableist nickname constantly upsets Oz’s pride, one of the main drives and a frequent breaking point for his character. “The Penguin” is yet another show starring an egomaniac in organized crime. But its shoulder-rubbing with the superhero genre gives it an excuse to be stranger and more eccentric than shows like “The Sopranos” or “Breaking Bad.” But that doesn’t mean that the Penguin is any less insidious as his crime drama contemporaries. In “The Penguin,” Oz feels far removed from his 1941 comic book origin. Small changes like the truncation of last name “Cobblepot” to just “Cobb” lend to the reality established in “The Batman.” Ultimately, this version of the Penguin brings a depth to the character that feels honest to Oswald Cobblepot while still taking the creative liberties it needed to in order to create an incredible protagonist. Oz works for the Falcone crime family, but after the death of patriarch Carmine Falcone (played by John Turturro in “The Batman,” but Mark Strong during flashbacks in “The Penguin”) he is emboldened to try and push his way to the top. Oz’s goals contradict those of the new Falcone leadership: Carmine’s son Alberto (Michael Zegen) and Carmine’s daughter Sofia (Cristin Milioti), who was recently released from Arkham Asylum after serving a decade for a string of murders. This conflict comes to the forefront when Oz snaps and murders one of his fellow members of the Falcone mob. To help hide the body from the Falcones and the police, Oz recruits a young man he finds trying to steal one of his tires. From that point on, Victor Aguilar (Rhenzy Feliz) becomes Oz’s sidekick as he pits the Falcone and Maroni crime families against each other. As the show goes on, Victor, Sofia and Oz are all precisely characterized, each having their own dedicated arc. The slow and deliberate drip of new details keeps the audience in suspense as to the true motivations and origins of the three main characters, layering the past with the present to create an intense and focused drama. Aside from the stars, one other performance that it would be negligent not to mention is Clancy Brown’s chilling portrayal of Salvatore “Sal” Maroni, the patriarch of the Maroni family and one of the main antagonists. Sal is scarily resilient and uniquely hateful, creating the feeling that his defeat would be impossible. During “The Penguin,” Oz is constantly driven by a desire for others’ approval. This heavily influences one of the most fascinating and complex relationships in the show, the one between Oz and his mother Francis (Deirdre O’Connell). Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Francis is old and sick and constantly tells Oz how much more he could be doing for her. One warning sign of her more toxic traits comes when she calls him a “pussy” for being evasive with his mob enemies rather than killing them head-on. In the end, Francis and Oz’s mother-son relationship is irreversibly transformed by flashbacks in the final episodes of the show. Throughout the show, Oz is given plenty of heartfelt and loving moments with those around him. He is an inspiration to kids like him from crappy neighborhoods who could barely dream of rising as high as Oz — or at least that’s what he tells himself. Despite these moments, as the final credits roll on “The Penguin,” it’s hard to think about anything besides how evil he is. In the end, the only thing that really speaks to how evil the Penguin is the feeling deep in your gut as you watch the final scenes play out. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Miles Morales (Shameik Moore) and Gwen Stacy (Hailee Steinfeld) take on The Spot (Jason Schwartzman) in Columbia Pictures and Sony Pictures Animation's SPIDER-MAN™: ACROSS THE SPIDER-VERSE. ARTS ‘Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse’ is a web-slinging, dimension-hopping masterpiece By Kennan Chojnacki June 28, 2023 | 2:00am CDT "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse" lives up to the high bar set by "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse" released in 2018. The movie is a dazzling spectacle with fantastic voice acting, animation and writing which culminates in one of the best multiverse stories played out on screen in modern cinema. Written by Chris Miller, Phil Lord and David Callaham and directed by Joaquim Dos Santos, Justin K. Tompson and Kemp Powers, "Across the Spider-Verse" is set one year after the events of "Into the Spider-verse" when Miles Morales (Shameik Moore) is struggling to balance family obligations, school and the responsibilities of being Spider-Man. After trying to stop an initially weak villain, Spot (Jason Schwartzman), Miles misses important family events, straining his relationship with his family. Miles begins to question his purpose as Spider-Man and the dilemma of being with his family or saving others. At the same time, Spot becomes a more formidable villain who threatens all of the multiverse, leading the Spider-Society to send Ghost-Spider Gwen Stacy (Hailee Steinfeld) to Miles' world to deal with the situation. Gwen’s arrival leads to Miles getting involved in another multiversal adventure that results in him being introduced to the head of the Spider-Society, Miguel O'Hara (Oscar Isaac). But after things go south, Miles must outrun Miguel and the rest of the Spider-Society before they can prevent Miles from stopping a tragedy. One of the best features of this movie is the unique animation style first seen in “Into the Spider-verse.” For the past two decades, animation has shied away from stylistic and “risky” animation in exchange for photorealism. However, the Spider-Verse series has innovated arguably the most high-profile alternative to photorealism. The movies blend 3D and 2D animation styles with a hint of comic book aesthetic to create a unique, never-before-seen animation style. The movie is truly a spectacle to watch. A huge amount of credit should be given to the Sony Animation team that worked on this movie. Not only did they reutilize a distinctive animation style for Miles' world, but each of the four other universes he visits also has a unique look. The aesthetics of each of the universes were built with the help of the original comic book artists who first envisioned them. Each universe has a different color scheme, character design and animation style which keeps the movie feeling fresh and new. The best example is Gwen’s homeworld of Earth-65, which predominantly uses a cool-color palette with a comic book aesthetic. When more emotional scenes play out, the detail of the background is lost to blobs of colors that work to enhance the character’s feelings and show clashing ideologies. The world truly demonstrates how the animation is not just for a fresh aesthetic but is also used to enhance the story’s mood. Another critical item to note about the film is that the movie does not rely on easter eggs and nostalgia to carry the plot. Whereas many modern Hollywood films and Television shows have become over-reliant on nostalgia and familiar tropes to carry a weak plot, “Across the Spider-Verse” has a plot that can stand on its own with great character growth and themes elevated through easter eggs and nostalgic moments. The voice actors and actresses in this film all deliver their lines in a way that adds something to their characters. Moore elevates Miles' internal conflict regarding what it means to be a hero through his dynamic voice range. Similarly, Steinfeld continues to deliver fantastic voice acting for Ghost-Spider that compliments the more dramatic moments her character faces in the film. A standout in this film is Daniel Kaluuya as Spider-Punk, who is portrayed as a wild card throughout the film. Kaluuya plays his character with a fun wittyness that adds natural humor to the film while still keeping the viewer intrigued as to what his character may do. Oscar Isaac and Jason Schwartzman both do stellar jobs playing the villains in the film. Isaac delivers his lines with a power that establishes his dominance on screen while also pointing out the authoritarian nature of the Spider-Society. Schwartzman has an interesting way of delivering his lines, with his voice slowly becoming more confident throughout the movie showing how his character is a growing threat. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse” clocks in at 2 hours and 19 minutes, but the movie does not feel that long. It has excellent pacing that allows for the dramatic scenes to be fleshed out, and the dramatic moments impact the plot and audience while still allowing for enough action scenes to keep the audience engaged. With a proven track record of two excellent movies, I can't wait to see what the next movie in the Spider-Verse franchise will add to the universe. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball splits doubleheader against Minnesota Wisconsin Badgers softball went 1-1 in their double header in Minneapolis this past Wednesday. By Abby Shulman April 18, 2024 | 11:56am CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took a road trip Wednesday to play the Minnesota Golden Gophers in a doubleheader, silencing the Gophers in the first game before losing the second. Magnanimo tosses a no-hitter After walking the first batter, starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo retired the next 20 through a total of 83 pitches, winning the Badgers’ first no-hitter of the season 3-0. On top of Magnanimo’s six strikeouts, the rest of the defense had her back, completing an errorless game. Relief pitcher Hilary Blomberg broke the ice for the Badgers in the third with a two-run RBI double. The scoring took a break until infielder Alivia Bark scored an insurance run in the top of the seventh. Third baseman Skylar Sirdashney dove for the ball in the bottom of the seventh, securing the no-hitter and ensuring Magnanimo threw seven scoreless innings. Splitting the DH The adrenaline of winning their first game against Minnesota since 2016 wasn’t enough to prevent a 7-3 loss hours later. The Golden Gophers went up 3-0 in game two by the bottom of the second, with one run in the first inning and two in the second off starter Shelby Jacobson. Wisconsin tied the game in the fourth at 3-3. The Badgers’ first run was an RBI single from outfielder Brooke Kuffel that brought home infielder Grace O’Brien, who hustled home from second. The next run came from outfielder Kate Linkletter, who raced home from third after a dropped third strike to continue on the streak of speed. The final Badger run of the inning and game was Bark’s sacrifice bunt that drove Kuffel home. While the scoring ended for the Badgers, the Golden Gophers made a comeback. They scored three more runs in the bottom frame, extending their lead to 6-3 after a three-run slam. Jacobson allowed one more run in the fifth before Blomberg came in from the bullpen, cutting the game at 7-3. Wisconsin improved their record to .400 and will head back home to take on Penn State on April 19-21 at Goodman Softball Complex. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Omar Waheed | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET Campus cops taking tips on torrid toilet use Campus police are searching for leads to bust busters in Mosse Humanities bathrooms. By Omar Waheed February 2, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. A spree of lascivious lavatory use in Mosse Humanities left campus police looking for real public bathroom users to narc on students engaging in primal perpetual pounding in the toilets. “It's becoming a safety hazard,” said UW-Madison Police Chief Kristen Roman. “We’re getting endless reports of faculty and students slipping on semen and sustaining injuries in Mosse.” The penetrative perpetrators continuously evade the UW Police Department. Campus police are at their wit’s end but found money in their budget to purchase an armored personnel carrier (APC) to “decrease campus crime,” Roman said. Students have raised concern over the excessive policing and inflated police budgets after seeing the vehicle stroll through campus. UW-Madison police spent $1.6 million on a Japanese- produced Type 96 wheeled APC. UWPD said its new APC is necessary for effective crime prevention to end erotic exhibitions in bathrooms. “If somebody looks out and sees a Ford Crown Victoria sitting out there, they may not take you very seriously,” Roman said. “But if they look at the window and see this thing sitting there, they’re going to know you’re serious.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More I graduated from PETA University. Now I electroejaculate monkeys Catch me feds! I ballot stuffed 450 times in the 2024 election I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university
A Board of Regents policy change will allow UW System schools to grant businesses and other organizations the naming rights to buildings, potentially creating a new revenue source. Photo by Jeff Miller | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW System’s 2024 review proposes major changes amid financial debate As the University of Wisconsin System navigates its 2024 review, sweeping proposals and financial debates bring the system’s future into focus. By Alaina Walsh December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin System faces significant financial and structural decisions following the release of its 2024 review Monday that highlights ongoing budgetary struggles and governance debates. Recommendations by a legislative committee looking into the future of the state’s public university system, to separate UW-Madison from other campuses and a contentious budget request display the challenges of balancing fiscal responsibility with educational equity. Legislative leaders remain divided on the path forward, signaling a critical juncture for Wisconsin’s higher education landscape. Earlier this year, UW System leaders requested $855 million in state funding for the 2025-27 biennium, noting that Wisconsin ranks 43rd in state funding for its public universities. The proposed funding aims to address rising operational costs, staff wage increases and initiatives supporting mental health and academic services. Legislators including Rep. Amanda Nedweski, R-Pleasant Prairie, have dismissed the request as unrealistic, pointing to Wisconsin’s higher investments in the state’s technical colleges as a mitigating factor. Among the most contentious recommendations is the potential separation of UW-Madison from the rest of the UW System. Advocate, Nedweski, argues that creating distinct governance structures could address enrollment declines and financial deficits at regional campuses while allowing Madison to leverage its unique strengths independently. Critics, including UW Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin and Gov. Tony Evers, however, warn that such a move could exacerbate inequities across the system and undermine the collective identity of Wisconsin’s public universities. Budget negotiations are further complicated by political battles over UW System diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) positions. A recent deal between the UW System and Republican legislators sought to eliminate DEI programming while releasing previously withheld pay raises and funding key infrastructure projects, including a new engineering building at UW-Madison. However, this compromise has drawn criticism from both sides, with Republicans pushing for further DEI cuts and Democrats defending the system’s inclusivity initiatives. Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, has been a central figure in these debates, advocating for ideological reforms at the state’s public universities. Last week, Vos responded to the UW System budget request saying that it was likely a nonstarter, despite UW System’s President Jay Rothman agreeing to Republican demands regarding DEI programming. Vos did not respond for a comment. With Wisconsin’s $4 billion budget surplus, stakeholders remain divided on how best to allocate resources to balance the system’s immediate needs with long-term stability. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Bailey Krause | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S HOCKEY Badgers women's hockey sweep Tommies in record-breaking weekend During two intense games against St. Thomas, Casey O’Brien made her 139th assist, earning her the all-time assist title in the program's history, while Caroline Harvey scored her 100th career point. By Clara Strecker November 27, 2024 | 5:17pm CST The No. 1 Wisconsin women's hockey team swept St. Thomas last weekend, winning 6-1 Friday and 5-2 Saturday. An exciting start Directly after the puck drop on Friday, massive energy flowed off the Badgers. Not even three minutes into the first period, sophomore forward Claire Enright found the back of the net after a pass from Sarah Wozniewicz, who managed her way through the offensive zone on a two-on-two. The quick goal did not dissipate the energy for Wisconsin. About four minutes later on an odd-player rush, junior forward Kirsten Simms managed to tip the puck in, doubling the score for the Badgers. With 1:23 left on the clock, St. Thomas freshman forward Isla Lindaman entered the penalty box for tripping, and the Badgers took the advantage. Senior forward Lacey Eden scored on the power play with just 45.5 seconds left on the clock, making the crowd go wild. The Badgers started strong, ending the first period with a 3-0 lead with 12 shots on goal compared to St. Thomas’ seven. Starting the second period, St. Thomas came out slightly more aggressive and prepared defensively and offensively, stopping multiple shots and breakaways and not allowing the Badgers to capitalize on them. But this did not stop the Badgers. After a fantastic save by Badgers goaltender Ava McNaughton, Wisconsin rushed to the other end passing back and forth until sophomore forward Cassie Hall was able to tip it behind St. Thomas’ goaltender and into the back of the net. Soon thereafter, the Tommies came back fighting and managed to get one behind McNaughton, scoring their singular goal of the game. Firing up after their goal, St. Thomas had a couple of close shots on goal, but they were not able to score again. The Badgers ended the period with over double the shots on goal compared to the Tommies. Just 40 seconds into the third and final period of the game, with a massive burst of energy and rush down the ice, sophomore forward Kelly Gorbatenko took a snap shot, earning her fifth goal of the season and adding to the Badgers’ lead. After many attempted shots and very close calls, the Badgers capitalized again. Freshman forward Finley McCarthy added to the tally halfway through the period, and the Badgers sealed the win. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Securing the sweep and breaking records Game two began with high energy from both teams. Right from the get-go, not even a minute into the game, the Badgers rushed to the Tommies’ goal, where fifth year forward Casey O’Brien slipped one in, giving Wisconsin an early lead. Despite their early lead, the first period was an exhausting battle, where both the Badgers and the Tommies came out to fight. Wisconsin hit shot after shot and chased rebounds to attempt again, yet none of them found the back of the net. There were a couple of very close calls for the Badgers, keeping the fans on the edge of their seats. St. Thomas mainly played defensively in the first period, they had a couple of breakaways which McNaughton skillfully defended. Wisconsin had double the shots on goal with 15 compared to St. Thomas’ meek five, during a low-scoring first period. Near the beginning of the second period, senior defender Katie Kotlowski was sent to the penalty box for two minutes for tripping.The Badgers managed the penalty kill with a couple of breakaways, but St. Thomas scored right after Kotlowski was let out of the box. In a scramble at the goal, Tommies sophomore forward Madison Brown managed to tip the puck in, scoring the equalizer. Not even two minutes later, a fired-up Wisconsin team passed back and forth down the ice, allowing Edwards to pass the puck to Hall to score. A minute and a half later, the Badgers scored again. After a beautiful long pass down the ice, Edwards hit a nice shot where she eventually tipped the puck in, giving Wisconsin the lead again at 2-1. O’Brien picked up her 139th assist in her career as a Badger, surpassing Sara Bauer and breaking the school record. O’Brien said in a post-game interview how she is delighted to contribute to this teams success, with the main focus staying on the team and keeping the individual milestones as an afterthought. When discussing the game's goals she added “I don’t really care how it happened, just happy we got the goal, especially where that game was at, we kind of needed it, energy wise.” With just less than five minutes left in the period, sophomore defender Ava Murphy went into the box for roughing, giving St. Thomas their second power play of the game. Tensions only grew when the Tommies almost scored, causing a fight to almost break out. Exactly like their previous power play, directly after Murphy exited the box and Wisconsin managed the penalty kill, St. Thomas scored, tightening the Badgers’ lead to one to 3-2. With a close score, Wisconsin came out strong in the third period. Almost four minutes into play, Tommies senior defender Alli Pahl went into the box for a minor for hooking. Caroline Harvey scored her 100th career point on the power play, extending the Badgers’ lead with a beautiful wrist shot that went right past the St. Thomas goalie. “I just have the greatest team here. I am never focused on the individual accolades, but I was proud of Casey when that came up,” Harvey added in her interview. “When it happened it was a great pass by Lacey, got set up on the power play from everyone on the ice so I couldn’t do it without my teammates. Nothing I care too much about but moving forward and focusing on the next weekend.” With eight minutes left, the Badgers added their fifth and final goal to the board as they found a breakaway where Simms sent a pass to O’Brien who shot the puck in. The Badgers ended the game 5-2, adding their 16th win of the season. Wisconsin is back on the road this weekend and will face Maine Nov. 29 at 5 p.m. CST and Nov. 30 at 3 p.m. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Clara StreckerClara Strecker is a copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She also covers state news. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Assistant Professor Jean Laurenz plays the trumpet at "Descended" on October 20, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Ellie Huber | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey A literary giant and Laurenz’ ancestor, Lafcadio Hearn’s compelling insights on the depths of humankind and the paranormal are the inspiration behind the show. By Ellie Huber December 3, 2024 | 2:00am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison assistant professor of trumpet Jean Laurenz created “DESCENDED,” a multimedia show of chamber music, theatrical performance and film that played at the Memorial Union Black Box theater on Oct. 19 and 20. The show aims to take its audience on a spiritual quest to the paranormal and an otherworldly state of mind. “It’s about what happens when we, in our real physical lives, hit that membrane or cross over into that space of the beyond,” Laurenz told The Daily Cardinal. “Of the things that we'll never be able to touch, whether it's the moon or our spiritual ponderings […] We can find beauty within fear.” Laurenz fills the room with vocals and her trumpet and is joined by professional musicians Maria Finkelheier and Greg Jukes. The three co-direct and are featured in this 55-minute show, with visuals by Xuan, the film by Four/Ten Media and music by Finkelmeier. Their work has amassed 15 nominations and awards, including from the Wisconsin Film Festival. Laurenz’ great-great uncle and accomplished writer Lafcadio Hearn is the muse behind “DESCENDED.” A 19th century journalist, wayward traveler, teacher and meta-folk-ghost-story writer, Hearn followed his heart into the unknown. Hearn’s metaphysical literature explores paranormal and dissonant cognitive states, and Laurenz found peace through his story as she navigated the uncertainties of a career in the arts. “I found a lot of hope and inspiration in how one can build a beautiful life that wanders,” Laurenz said. “It gave me so much comfort just to know that I come from somebody like that.” In their post-performance Q&A, the artists shared how liberating they feel letting go of the sheet music and focusing on gestures and the narrative arc. Rather than sticking to a rigid plan, they bring about authentic evocations, connecting to their storytelling on a deeply emotional level. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Shar-Ron Buie, the associate director of JustDane, calls for government regulation to address extreme heat in Wisconsin prisons at a press conference on Nov. 20, 2024. Photo by Audrey Lopez-Stane | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS ‘The walls sweat’: Extreme heat in Wisconsin prison systems prompts calls for major regulation A press conference held by University of Wisconsin-Madison Capstone students called for significant change to fix severe heating issues in Wisconsin prisons. By Audrey Lopez-Stane November 23, 2024 | 10:25am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison students and advocates called for government regulation to address extreme heat in all corrections facilities across the state at a press conference Wednesday. UW-Madison Capstone students held the press conference to bring attention to the growing crisis of heat vulnerability in Wisconsin prisons. In Wisconsin, prison temperatures can reach as high as 97 degrees Fahrenheit in the summer. Temperatures above 80 degrees Fahrenheit can show a 20% increase in violent interactions in prison. “The walls sweat, and the paint peels,” James Morgan, lead organizer for criminal justice reform advocacy group MOSES, said at Wednesday’s press conference. He added that the conditions inside the state’s prisons “cause mental, physical and emotional harm,” and stressed that prisoners are human beings, not just “violent criminals.” Shar-Ron Buie, associate director of JustDane, a nonprofit organization that advocates for previously incarcerated people, said the unreasonably high temperatures in Wisconsin prisons “transcends mere discomfort.” Buie voiced that correct temperatures in prison are not a luxury but necessities for basic survival. The environment becomes more violent and illnesses become more prevalent under high temperatures, which correlates with higher rates of heat-related deaths. Wisconsin prisoners, however, do not get a choice in their climate. “Temperatures are controlled from a centralized location, often arbitrarily and capriciously decided on by the officer,” Buie said at Wednesday’s press conference. Even when prisoners attempt to block air vents, Buie said there is little escape from the unbearable heat. WISDOM Transformational Justice Campaign Coordinator Mark Rice touched on his own experience in the Wisconsin prison system and said “forcing people to live in extreme heat is a form of torture.” James Wilborn, a close colleague of Rice, died in the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility in 2015. While Rice and other activists said that heat exhaustion contributed to Wilborn’s death, the Wisconsin Department of Corrections (DOC) Communications Director Beth Hardtke told The Daily Cardinal in a statement Nov. 21 there were zero heat-related deaths in Wisconsin DOC facilities since 2013. The DOC declined to comment on Wilborn’s individual cause of death. Rice attributed prisoner maltreatment to aggressive rhetoric and monetary reasons. The dehumanizing narrative about prisoners results in government and taxpayer opposition for further prison funding. But this does not diminish the need for safe prison environments, he said. Although Hardtke said the DOC is planning air tempering projects for multiple Wisconsin facilities, she acknowledged that most DOC buildings are still not universally air conditioned. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball claims series against Hoosiers in Bloomington Wisconsin Badgers softball went two for three against the Hoosiers to improve on their overall record. By Abby Shulman April 30, 2024 | 11:43am CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Indiana Hoosiers in a three-game series April 26-28. After coming up short in the first game, they made a comeback to steal the series win. Opening with a close loss Wisconsin was up 5-0 until the middle of the fifth inning on Friday when the Hoosiers retaliated to come away with the 6-5 victory. First baseman Fiona Girardot cranked a leadoff homer in the first, followed by catcher Emmy Wells’ lead-extending solo home run in the fourth. The Badgers then broke through with a three-run rally in the fifth. Relief pitcher Hilary Blomberg’s double drove in shortstop Ava Kuszak before Wells’ power show continued. Her second home run of the game — a two-run blast into deep left — made the score 5-0 by the middle of the fifth. The Hoosiers crashed the party in the bottom of the fifth for a heartbreaking comeback that started with a series of singles, cashing in two runs. By the end of the sixth, the Hoosiers were only down by one run after Wisconsin starting pitcher Gabi Salo’s pitch was drilled into left for a two-run homer. The Hoosiers tied the game then stole the win in the seventh. Evening up the series The Badgers started off with the lead again in game two Saturday and made sure to finish what they started, walking away with an 8-6 victory. Wisconsin right fielder Brooke Kuffel led the way with an RBI in the first, bringing left fielder Kate Linkletter home for the early 1-0 lead. The Hoosiers got on the board earlier in game two, tying the Badgers in the second when the runner on third stole home. Following a scoreless third inning, Wisconsin’s five-run fourth inning drove the Badgers to a victory. A series of RBIs and errors led outfielder Alivia Bark, third baseman Skylar Sirdashney and outfielder Eden Echevarria home. The streak continued with Blomberg hammering the ball out of left-center for a two-run homer that made it 7-1. By the end of the inning, the Hoosiers cut their deficit to 7-2 with a run. The Badgers’ offense quickly bounced back in the sixth with two more insurance runs — Wells and outfielder Molly Schlosser crossed home plate thanks to Kuffel’s RBI double. In the bottom frame, Badger starting pitcher Shelby Jacobson allowed four runs before Blomberg took the mound to end it an 8-6 game. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Securing the series victory Wisconsin dominated in the series closer with a 7-1 sweep on Sunday. With an RBI double from Blomberg and Wells’ third home run of the series — another two-run homer smoked to deep left — the Badgers were up 3-0 by the end of the first inning. The Hoosiers got in their one and only run of the game off Wisconsin’s pitcher Jacobson during the third, scoring on a fielder’s choice. In the fourth, Kuszak took the plate with two walked Badgers on bases — Sirdashney and Hubbard — when she tanked the pitch over the left field wall for a three-run drill. Finally, second baseman Ellie Hubbard’s double in the fifth drove Kuffel home for the game’s closing run. With a total of 24 hits and 20 runs across the series, Wisconsin improved their season record to .413 (19-27). They close their Big 10 season with a series against the Maryland Terrapins May 3-5 back home in Madison. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Material Intelligence exhibit. Photo courtesy of Center for Design and Material Culture. ARTS UW ‘Material Intelligence’ exhibit threads meaning into matter “Material Intelligence” exhibit in the School of Human Ecology invites individuals to think about how materials shape the spaces around us. By Lillian Mihelich November 21, 2024 | 3:00am CST When you walk into the School of Human Ecology's Ruth Davis Design Gallery from now until March 9, you'll be greeted with materials of all kinds — cascading, thread art installations, glass sculptures, funky chairs and more — each demonstrating how humans shape our world through materials. The “Material Intelligence” exhibit, free to the public, is a culmination of materials that we use as humans, innovators and adaptors that shape our physical surroundings, inspired by the Material Intelligence online publication. This exhibit in particular, explores two materials: glass in a research, educational and museum-style display as well as threads in a more gallery-style manner. “Materials can help us think about an artist's practice and vision, materials can help us think about glass as a research material — the ‘Material Intelligence’ idea can contain all of those, and we wanted to show that both through the work we display and how we display that work,” said Sarah Ann Carter, material intelligence curator and executive director of the Center for Design and Material Culture. On the left side of the exhibit, “Threads: Natural Fibers and Living Lines,” a linen and fiber display, showcases the work of Ann Coddington, fiber artist and professor emeritus from Eastern Illinois University. Coddington devotes a lot of her time to her studio practice, teaching and creating designs that practices up to hundred-of-thousands of years old. “It’s really interesting to be engaging in a practice with such an ancient history in this current, sort of modern, digital age and extend that practice into the future,” Coddington told The Daily Cardinal. Coddington's art presents in dynamic ways, embodying movement and sculptures that emerge from natural fibers. Her portion of the exhibit is more gallery-style, the artwork is spread out between groups of objects so that you can look at her work as their own, individual pieces of art, according to Carter. “Ann Coddington's beautiful, poetic and evocative work in ‘Threads’ helps us think about another kind of material, in this case linen, which can be transformed into the different kinds of sculptures of work in a totally different way,” Carter said. Net-like figures hang from the ceiling, and the threaded designs come in a range of sizes and styles. Some have large gaps in between, like a group of hanging nets, and some are tightly threaded sculptures. Coddington's "Little Arm” sculpture explores her relationship with her daughter and the feeling of being far apart. Paying homage to the title of the exhibit, Coddington has created a piece called "Work in Progress,” which she will continue to work on throughout its duration. "I think it’s nice for the viewer to be able to see the construction of it,” Coddington said. “That technique is called twining; it’s an off-loom weaving process. We usually think of weaving like a loom, and it’s very similar to that except it’s not loom-based.” Coddington will teach this technique at an upcoming workshop. On the right side of the exhibit, glass adorns the “Spheres of Influence” portion, which explores how glassmakers, glass inventions and glassblowers have impacted the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s education and life. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email There's a captivating spread of sculptural invertebrates from the 1800s, fashioned by a German father-and-son duo Leopold and Rudolph Blaschka, who developed the Blaschka models. The sculptures were recreated by professional glass blowers and are on loan from the UW-Madison Zoological Museum. There’s also stones from UW-Madison’s Geology Museum and lantern teaching slides from UW-Madison's Astronomy department. In the back of the exhibit sits a Work in Progress Lab, where viewers can find directions for starting projects like crochet, mending, felting and beyond. "We're thinking hard about how we can slow down visitors experiences in a gallery — creating an experience where people want to come in, look around, maybe learn something, maybe look around, maybe get excited and then be incited to sit down, maybe connect with people and think about objects in the world around us,” Carter said. The “Material Intelligence” exhibit is supported by the Chipstone Foundation, the Anonymous Fund, The UW-Madison School of Education Impact 2030 Helen Burish Fund, the UW-Madison Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research with funding from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and the Marilynn R. Baxter Fund. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
"God of War" is out now for PlayStation 4. Photo by Image courtesy of BagoGames/Flickr | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘God of War’ breathes new life into the long-running PlayStation series By Marty Forbeck May 1, 2018 | 5:13pm CDT “God of War” was one of those series back on PlayStation 2 that delighted in being an oddball and benefited from it. It sits up there with “Silent Hill,” “Ico” and “Shadow of the Colossus” as one of those staples that was willing to be a bit more experimental than its contemporaries, playing with mechanics other developers hadn’t before. The new “God of War” on PlayStation 4 matches that legacy, if only just. Most properly, it should be called “God of War 4.” It’s a deep response to the flaws of its predecessors that also manages to bring back the Greco-Roman questions and themes which have been missing from the series for so long. How can a cycle of violence be broken? What does it mean that the Gods keep killing their parents? In such a tight-knit community as that of the Gods, what does family even mean? To talk about the 2018 “God of War,” you first have to talk about the PS2 original, so to anyone who’s afraid of spoilers for a game that came out in 2005, skip the next paragraph. The plot of “God of War” was simple: We were introduced to Kratos, a captain in the Spartan army who was tricked by Ares — the Greek god of war — into killing his own family during a raid. The entire game is spent with Kratos on a revenge quest to kill Ares. You end up having to [literally] go to Hell and back, but you do it, and Kratos ends up becoming the new god of war. Guilt-riddled, he attempts suicide, but now that he’s immortal, he can’t. It was sad and poetic, and the next two games ditched those artistic elements entirely in favor of having Kratos kill the rest of the Greek pantheon, presumably out of spite? It wasn’t particularly pleasant or interesting, or even sensical. Compared to the last couple of titles in the series, this new “God of War” is a breath of fresh air. Still, the combat and story standards set by the first game were touchstones for years afterward. The original “God of War’s” mix of hack-and-slash combat, quick-time events, light RPG elements and massive boss fights were copied by dozens of games in the years that followed. Ironically, the new “God of War” has combat that plays more like “Dark Souls,” the new game that everyone is copying. The RPG mechanics are much deeper and more important now: Kratos’s character screen reads more like a “Dungeons and Dragons” character sheet than his original list of unlockable abilities. "Whereas in the original you could take down a hallway of mooks with one furious combo move, a grunt enemy in the new 'God of War' can take you down in a couple of hits." Fighting enemies is much slower and methodical, especially early on. Whereas in the original you could take down a hallway of mooks with one furious combo move, a grunt enemy in the new “God of War” can take you down in a couple of hits. You know, like “Dark Souls.” Admittedly, this has its benefits. The original’s combat was always pretty mindless, and the “Dark Souls” style tends to be more rewarding as a result. The addition of finishing moves and range-focused combat does give this game’s variation on the “Souls” formula more flare, especially late in the game as new features are added in. But for the first few hours, you won’t be blamed for thinking the game feels pretty familiar. But that’s the number one problem with the new “God of War” — it gets great if you stick around. The game’s story operates on my least favorite of all video game narrative structures, which is something I like to call the “moving the goalposts” structure. It goes like this: You’re given one goal at the beginning that you will pursue for 80 to 90 percent of the game’s duration. You’re constantly told this goal is just two or three missions away, but every time you beat those missions, some unforeseen, un-foreshadowed obstacle pops up, and the goal moves another two or three missions away. It’s a structure designed to string the player along for as long as possible while giving them as little as possible. At best — as in this game — it’s an excuse to take players on a sightseeing tour. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Normally this frustrates me to no end, but the game makes about as good a use of this terrible structure as it can. Each time the goalposts move, the world opens up a bit, and you’re allowed to go on exactly one optional side quest to calm down your frustration. It helps that every quest was written and designed with care. This is the first game in the series since the original “God of War” that has all of its characters in order. "Everyone is fleshed out and feels like a real person rather than an angry caricature." While it’s still an exceedingly masculine story, the female characters aren’t one-dimensional supermodels designed to appeal to adolescent boys (as in all the previous titles). Everyone is fleshed out and feels like a real person rather than an angry caricature. Your objectives are simple and somber enough to fit the slower, more mature tone. The game makes excellent use of its twenty-some hour runtime, even if there are still ways it could’ve been polished down and used more effectively. It’s probable that this new “God of War” won’t have the same impact as its predecessor of the same name, but in terms of modern AAA single-player games, you can’t do much better than this. It’s a fine story that’s well-told. It understands its characters and its medium, along with how to add complexities to each. It almost feels greedy to ask for more — not that we shouldn’t. Final Grade: A- Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball loses home series against Penn State Wisconsin Badgers softball scored more total runs than Penn State this weekend but still lost the overall series. By Abby Shulman April 22, 2024 | 1:26pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Penn State Nittany Lions at the Goodman Softball Complex on April 19-21. Wisconsin scored a total of 20 runs over the three-day stretch compared to Penn State’s 16 runs but still went 1-2 for the series. Coming up short Wisconsin started off on the wrong foot during Friday’s series opener, losing 3-1 with 11 Badger strikeouts and only two hits. After Wisconsin’s fielding eliminated the first three batters in the top of the first — one being a strikeout by starter Tessa Magnanimo, who pitched all seven innings — the second inning saw Penn State’s batter crank a leadoff solo homer for a 1-0 lead after the bottom of the second. By the third inning, Penn State led 3-0, resulting from two RBIs when Badgers dove for the balls in play but fell short. Magnanimo locked in and allowed no more runs, and the Badgers improved in the sixth during both frames. They escaped a jam during the top of the inning when second baseman Ellie Hubbard chucked the ball to catcher Emmy Wells, nabbing the runner out at home. They entered the bottom frame and broke the hitless streak when shortstop Ava Kuszak tanked the ball just short of the centerfield wall, sliding into second. They closed at Goodman as a 3-1 ballgame after right fielder Brooke Kuffel attacked a pitch for a solo homer, making this her eighth homerun of the season. Runaway victory comeback While Penn State scored three runs again Saturday, Wisconsin shot out to score a whopping total of 17 in just 4.5 innings. After a dry first inning, Wisconsin secured an early look toward victory during the bottom of the second after relief pitcher Hilary Blomberg and Kuszak both drove in two with doubles for a dominating 4-0 start. Magnanimo started again, giving up an RBI walk and solo homer that cut Penn State’s deficit to 4-2, but the Badgers retaliated in the bottom of the third. After Kuffel and center fielder Peyton Bannon claimed bases, third baseman Skylar Sirdashney crushed a three-run drill out of the park to give the Badgers a 7-2 lead. As if they hadn't put on enough of a power show, the Badgers swept the Nittany Lions in a ten-run inning. The inning began with Kuszak’s seventh home run of the season after sending the ball into deep left. The next ten batters reached the bases, with the first Badgers grand slam since 2017 from Sirdashney and a three-run blast from Blomberg before the run rule shut the inning down. Relief pitcher Gabi Salo took the mound in the fifth, giving up a solo homer to end the game after the top of the fifth, 17-3. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Losing the series Unable to secure the series win, Wisconsin lost 10-2 in the rubber match Sunday. Magnanimo started on the mound again, giving up a two-run dinger in the first. The Badgers trailed after the first but moved toward a comeback, making it 2-1 in the bottom frame as Wells escaped a full count by launching the pitch into center for an RBI double that drove Kuszak home. The third inning was scoreless but had its share of notable plays. On defense, left fielder Alivia Bark’s catch removed the first batter, followed by a double play to end the short frame. Bark singled and Bannon got out trying to steal home in the next frame. The Nittany Lions snagged another run during the fourth and broke through with a six-run rally in the sixth. Bannon robbed a run with a leaping throw to Wells but couldn’t avoid a grand slam. The Badgers retaliated with a run of their own when Blomberg homered on a sharp fly ball before taking the relief role on the mound in the final inning, giving up one more run. The Badgers will play the Indiana Hoosiers in Bloomington on April 26-28 for their penultimate series before closing the season at home against the Maryland Terrapins on May 3-5. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Pro-Palestine protesters call for divestment outside of a Board of Regents meeting at Gordon Dining and Event Center at 8:00 a.m. on December 5, 2024. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says UWPD announced Tuesday the 19 protesters arrested for disrupting a Board of Regents meeting on Thursday will receive citations for deliberately creating a “volume of noise that unreasonably interfered” with the meeting. By Ella Hanley December 10, 2024 | 4:20pm CST The 19 pro-Palestine protesters arrested for disrupting a University of Wisconsin System Board of Regents meeting Thursday will receive citations for deliberately creating a “volume of noise that unreasonably interfered” with the meeting, UWPD announced Tuesday. One individual also received an additional citation for intentionally spitting on someone’s food in the meeting room. Around 50 pro-Palestine protesters disrupted a Board of Regents meeting at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. Thursday to demand UW-Madison financially and socially divest from Israel. Eight of those arrested were affiliated with UW-Madison, though it’s unclear if they were students or faculty. Two of those arrested were alumni, according to UWPD. Four of those arrested were affiliated with UW-Milwaukee, and five had no UW affiliation. UWPD detained the 19 protesters in Gordon Commons for a short period, prompting social media posts from UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) and other groups urging people to call UWPD and ask for the release of those detained. After the disruption, police officers prevented the public, journalists and even some UW officials from accessing the Board of Regents meeting, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. A UW-Madison police officer said the situation represented a “safety issue” and that they could watch the livestream. About 15 of those protesting were students from UW-Milwaukee, where a dozen UWM protesters held a one-minute disruption at a Board of Regents meeting last spring. Previously, the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standard launched an investigation into SJP on Dec. 6 for allegedly violating the university’s Expressive Activity Policy during the protest earlier that morning. University spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Dec. 7 that “UW supports the right to free expression within the bounds of the law and campus policy” and that the investigation and arrests were due to “disruptive behaviors” and violation of the Expressive Activity Policy. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo courtesy of the Wisconsin Film Festival. ARTS A claustrophobic, surprisingly funny thriller from the Wisconsin Film Festival By Spencer Ball May 25, 2023 | 8:12pm CDT Chan-woo takes a night off studying for his police exam to go drinking with old friends. The next thing he knows, he’s waking up in the apartment next door with a violent hangover, a cracked phone screen, a bruise on his cheek — and a dead body on the floor. “Next Door,” a student film by South Korean director Yeom Ji-ho, takes place almost entirely within two neighboring apartments as Chan-woo pieces together the events of the previous night while avoiding suspicion of any wrongdoing himself. In a lesser film, this restricted setting would do little more than signify a low production budget. But “Next Door” fully capitalizes on its cramped space for dramatic effect, keeping its characters trapped within the confines of doors, windows, and closets. The screenplay and cinematography work in tandem to turn an average student apartment into a pressure cooker, creating an unyielding air of suspense even when the next threat is yet to be revealed. Despite its premise and claustrophobic nature, “Next Door” is far from a gritty crime story. Chan-woo may be studying to become a cop, but he’s failed the exam several times, and this is clearly his first brush with a real crime scene. Additionally, the film maintains an ironic sense of comedy throughout. The overwhelmed and easily distracted protagonist can never quite piece anything together without help from an outside source. With a film of this nature, a twist is inevitable. “Next Door” is well aware of this fact and uses it to manipulate audience expectations. The first half of the film spends so much time hinting towards the most obvious twist that viewers are as blindsided as Chan-woo when something unexpected does happen. The film’s carefully crafted narration keeps the audience guessing and accentuates the suspense with healthy doses of ambiguity and distrust. These elements combine to create a surprisingly unique tone that defies easy classification. “Next Door” isn’t a pure thriller, black comedy or satire, but a cleverly crafted tale of deduction and morality in a confusing situation. The film is less concerned with formal genre conventions, instead choosing to provoke a series of visceral reactions, whether they be laughs, gasps or bated breaths. “Next Door” is not the kind of movie you’ll talk about years later. But its smart writing, cinematography and editing add up to a solid comedy thriller that’s well worth its 90-minute runtime. Grade: B Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Flags fly at a Trump rally in Waunakee, Wis. as people wait in line for entry. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Students were shocked by the 2024 election results. They shouldn’t be Letting campus serve as a political echo chamber may be comforting, but it will lead students to be disconnected from political realities. By Safa Razvi November 14, 2024 | 2:00am CST The election ignited outrage, distress and overwhelming emotions for young voters across the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Students are uncertain about the future of social policies such as abortion rights, privacy and immigration, but one thing remains certain: our country has never been more polarized and students on campus may not feel it. Many who voted for Vice President Kamala Harris found themselves completely shocked by the election's outcome, especially considering the support she garnered on campus. It may seem odd that students are so surprised by the outcome of an election that was always predicted to be razor-thin. It begs the question: are campuses glorified echo chambers? As students were surrounded by Harris-Walz advocates, petitions and rallies from the nominee herself, they became entrenched in her campaign. Harris won an overwhelming 75% of Dane County but lost Wisconsin by 30,000 votes. Many, myself included, were surprised by how far this outcome diverged from our campus experience. This shock is a result of campus echo chambers. On social media, in campus culture and through other forms of campaigning such as appearances on campus, students were caught up in a world where Harris’ victory seemed imminent. For many students, UW-Madison was their first exposure to life in a swing state — they were surprised to see it swing red after all the support Harris maintained throughout campus. The consequences of a campus echo chamber go beyond disappointment over election results. Selectively consuming media and information will only further us from understanding the political climate, which is necessary to address before the next election. If made more aware, we will have the power to be more dynamic citizens. Despite these overwhelming reactions, UW-Madison students have been resilient, opening up in different atmospheres and speaking out about their feelings. Tuesday night, the History Department hosted an open table conversation for undergraduate students to share their feelings regarding the election. Additionally, numerous people including students and celebrities took to social media to express their disappointment over the election results and call out the nation for supporting the economy over women’s autonomy and other social issues. Many feel like their apprehensions were ignored by a country they thought was progressing. In the wake of such disappointment, resources such as open table discussions and an opportunity to share personal feelings about the election would greatly benefit the mental burden some students are struggling with. As Harris said, “sometimes the fight takes a while.” This includes breaking out of our echo chambers which are keeping us blissfully unaware of the political realities we must confront. If we don’t, we’ll be left reeling from every unexpected outcome. Safa is a freshman studying journalism and economics. Do you agree that UW-Madison is an echo chamber? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
An adult Emerald Ash Borer. Photo courtesy of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. SCIENCE Researchers remain concerned while an invasive insect kills Wisconsin ash trees Emerald ash borer eats ash trees from the inside out, resulting in 99% mortality for trees in Dane County, according to PJ Liesch, an entomologist for the University of Wisconsin-Madison Extension. By Lindsay Pfeiffer December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST An invasive insect, the emerald ash borer (EAB), continues to kill ash trees across southern Wisconsin, including Dane County, and officials said tree mortality rates have risen. The insect is metallic green and only attacks ash trees. While the adult beetles eat ash leaves, EAB larvae eat the trees’ inner bark, killing them from the inside out. Michael Hillstrom, the invasive forest pest coordinator at the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, told The Daily Cardinal EAB is from east Asia and arrived in the United States in the early 2000s in packing crates. Wisconsin has four types of ash trees: green, white, black and blue, according to PJ Liesch, entomologist for the University of Wisconsin-Madison Extension. Green and white are commonly found in urban and forested areas, while black is found in swampy areas in the north, and blue is exceedingly rare in Wisconsin, he said. Hillstrom said that although EAB hasn’t reached the black ash yet, when it does it’ll be difficult to control. “We’re going to have major issues, where you have large areas that there are no other trees in there other than black ash or very few other trees. So it’s really difficult to access those sites to do anything about it,” he said. Wisconsin has a similar climate to EAB’s native range and is home to plenty of ash trees, making the state a perfect place for EAB to invade, according to Liesch. When EAB first arrived in Wisconsin in 2008, there were around 770 million ash trees in the state. Liesch said this is in part due to the die-off of other species of trees, like elms. When Dutch Elm disease killed off elms, ash trees became the replacement tree in many urban centers such as Milwaukee, he said. Why is EAB so threatening to ash trees? EAB larvae make s-shaped galleries in the water and food-moving tissues of the tree, which blocks the trees from moving nutrients around, Hillstrom said. As more and more larvae eat away the inner bark, the tree starts to die. “Each individual emerald ash borer larva might get up to about an inch long, but it’s death by a thousand paper cuts,” Liesch told the Cardinal. EAB is also incredibly hard to detect in the early stages. Female beetles lay their eggs in the upper branches of the tree, making it hard to detect the presence of EAB until it’s too late, Liesch said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Hillstrom said woodpeckers will eat EAB larvae, especially in the winter, by flicking off pieces of the bark in a process called “flecking.” However, woodpeckers also eat other insects, so officials have to check for other signs of EAB including D-shaped exit holes or S-shaped galleries formed by the larvae. Currently, southern Wisconsin, including Dane County, has approximately a 99% mortality rate, according to Liesch. Mortality rates are highest where EAB has been present the longest, and northern Wisconsin still has lower rates for now, he said. Hillstrom told the Cardinal that in the last few years, mortality rates have increased in Dane County, and the few ash trees left in urban areas are typically being treated for insecticide. “The vast majority of ash [in Dane County] that are not being treated by humans to keep them alive are dead at this point,” he said. How does EAB spread? Both Hillstrom and Liesch agree the biggest factor contributing to the spread of EAB is human activity. The adult beetles can fly but only up to a few miles, according to Hillstrom. The main way EAB is spread is through firewood, which is why it’s important to heat treat, age and buy local wood, he said. “If somebody from Madison’s ash tree dies and they take that wood and move it up to their cabin up north somewhere, the insects can still hatch out of that firewood and start a population in a new area,” Hillstrom said. How can EAB be controlled? Hillstrom said the most important thing to slow the spread of EAB is to create time. This allows cities and forests to respond to the dying trees as they slowly replace ash trees with other species. High-value ash trees, such as ones in residents’ yards, can be treated with insecticide, according to Hillstrom. Additionally, approximately 10,000 ash trees in Madison are treated by the city multiple times a year. Another approach to controlling EAB is biological control, a small silver lining, according to Liesch. Scientists found a small species of wasp that lives in the native range of EAB and only parasitizes EAB, he said. Hillstrom said these wasps don’t sting, and they feed on the larvae of EAB. They are released into forested areas with a lot of ash trees to combat EAB invasions. Researchers spent a lot of time and money to make sure these wasps wouldn’t harm native insects, Hillstrom said. “Those [wasps] can kill 20 to 80% of the larvae in an area, so it’s not something that’s going to get rid of emerald ash borer, but it’s another piece of that puzzle of knocking the population back, so it doesn’t spread as fast, and those trees have a chance to get bigger and produce seed,” Hillstrom said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Brooklyn Schwoerer, a sophomore at UW-Madison, and her Holstein cow Barracuda. Photo courtesy of Maddy Hensel/Dairy Agenda Today SCIENCE For the World Dairy Expo, cow health is key How dairy cattle nutrition and health impacts the lives of Wisconsin farmers and consumers. By Nicole Steele October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Brooklyn Schwoerer, a sophomore at the University of Wisconsin-Madison studying dairy science, lives on a 62-cow farm in Edgar, Wisconsin and is involved in all aspects of the dairy industry. Schoerer has been showing cows since she was three years old. This year, she got to show her black and white Holstein Barracuda at the annual World Dairy Expo in Madison. To celebrate dairy’s impact in Wisconsin, the World Dairy Expo brought all things dairy related to the Alliant Energy Center in a large four-day event from Oct. 1 to Oct. 4. With machinery, educational lectures and many exhibitioners showing their prized cows, the World Dairy Expo continues to showcase the large impact dairy brings to not just Wisconsin, but the world. Dairy farms are an integral part of Wisconsin’s economy, making a $46.5 billion economic impact each year and supporting over 100,000 jobs. With around 5,425 dairy herds, our state greatly depends on the cows as well as the farmers taking care of them. “Being able to interact and connect with all different kinds of people that share the same passion for dairy cattle as me is extremely rewarding,” Schwoerer said. Schwoerer’s family’s calves are fed milk until two months of age and then are given calf grain and hay to allow growth and stimulation of the rumen. When calves are eight months old, they will receive haylage or a total mixed ration. Once a heifer is pregnant, her diet is built to focus on the growth and development of her calf, Schwoerer said. Finally, when the cow freshens, it receives a high-protein diet to allow for the greatest amount of milk production. And show cows have unique nutritional needs, Schowerer said. “Show cattle are judged on their presence and appearance in the show ring. A judge looks for a dairy animal to be clean-cut, deep and, most importantly, dairy. [A] low-energy hay and a high-protein diet will ensure that the animal will keep off weight but will still continue to grow,” Schwoerer said. The process of showing a cow involves many months of preparation. In March, Schwoerer selected her show animals based on mobility, soundness of feet and legs and the style and blending of parts, such as the head into the shoulder and the back into the body. Once the animals are picked, a high-protein diet and pasture access is given to allow for exercise. Cow hair is also an important part of showing. Schwoerer rinses her animals with cold water at night and washes them every other day. Once a month, she shaves all the hair leaving the topline and belly, creating strong and healthy hair by showtime. “Before showing, cows need to be clear of any diseases. This includes no ringworm or warts,” Schwoerer said. “This year, lactating cows had to undergo an avian influenza test.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Fair attendees and exhibitors are at higher risk of infection from animal influenza viruses, but preventative measures such as avian flu testing for each animal and following preventative actions such as hand-washing and avoiding sick animals can prevent the spread. Cow health and nutrition are critical to showing prized cows, improving human diets The aspect of showing doesn’t just involve a beautiful cow getting judged in a ring. Cow health and nutrition play a large role in keeping these cows healthy and creating larger milk yields, according to Matt Akins, a dairy scientist and research leader for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Agricultural Research Service Dairy Forage Research Center in Marshfield, Wisconsin. “Nutrition can have great impacts on cow health, including ensuring adequate fiber, energy, protein, minerals and vitamins are provided in the diet to meet the cow’s needs for milk production and maintaining their bodies,” Akins told the Cardinal. Fiber maintains the health of a cow’s rumen by allowing for stimulation of cow chewing and saliva production, which helps avoid acidic rumen conditions, Akins said. Protein and essential amino acids that are important for a cow’s diet and immune function to help prevent pathogens. Vitamins and minerals, such as zinc for hoof health, selenium and vitamin E for immune function and choline for liver function play key roles in improving cow health. As with the important nutrients needed for a cow's overall health, their diet also plays a large role in maintaining health and high milk yield, Akins said. “50 to 70% of the cow’s diet is forage depending on the quality and nutritive value. Forages fed include alfalfa silage or hay, corn silage, grass silage or hay and other fibrous forages needed to ensure good rumen health,” Akins said. A cow’s diet not only affects the amount of milk they produce, but also the quality of their milk that humans consume. There is a direct relationship between nutrition quality and milk quality in cows, Akins said. “Cows that are grazed on pasture and consuming fresh forage have been found to have increased levels of carotenoids in the milk and changes in milk fat profiles,” Akins said. Carotenoids are naturally occurring plant pigments mammals only obtain through their diet. Some carotenoids have been found to increase vitamin A intake, have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties and improve ocular and cognitive health. Milk can drastically improve the vitamin A intake in human diets. Cows that receive a high quality forage diet have increased carotenoid levels in their milk, which therefore affects human consumption. In order for a cow to receive adequate nutrition, nutritionists play a large role on dairy farms. Akins told the Cardinal nutritionists help balance forages with supplemental feeds to meet nutrient requirements. They also keep up to date with new nutritional research and knowledge to help better a cow’s diet. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Why do leaves change colors in the fall? The chemical explanation behind the beauty of fall foliage. By Cassidy Darling October 31, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Ever wondered what exactly causes the leaves to shift from green to yellow, orange and red in fall? Turns out, it all comes down to the naturally occurring pigments and chemical transformations within the leaves. The key pigment is chlorophyll. This molecule turns sunlight into energy for the plant in the process called photosynthesis, University of Wisconsin-Madison chemistry professor emeritus Bassam Shakhashiri told The Daily Cardinal. “The leaves are green because they are giant factories for chlorophyll. Chlorophyll is a green pigment. Other chemicals are there also, but they are masked. They’re hidden by the immense presence of chlorophyll,” Shakhashiri said. Chlorophyll absorbs blue and red light from the sun and reflects green. This reflected light is what we see, causing the leaves to appear green. During the summer, the leaves are rich in chlorophyll as it is necessary to perform photosynthesis. However, the amount of chlorophyll present in the leaves is not constant throughout the year. In the fall, everything starts to change, and chlorophyll is destroyed as the trees prepare for winter. “When the temperature drops down more, the chlorophyll factories begin to shut down,” Shakhashiri said. This is when the other chemical pigments that were previously masked begin to shine through. Carotenoids, one of these pigments, appear yellow due to their absorption of blue and blue-green light. The carotenoids are destroyed at a slower rate than the chlorophyll, turning the leaves more yellow as chlorophyll content decreases. But what about the red and orange leaves we see? These are caused by other pigments called anthocyanins. Some trees create anthocyanins in the late summer and fall in order to prevent damage caused by the slowing of photosynthesis. As chlorophyll production decreases, the leaf can turn less and less of the sunlight it receives into energy, and any extra absorbed sunlight only causes trouble. Anthocyanins act as a shield against sunlight from entering the leaf, preventing damage and also reflecting red light. So, if a leaf has carotenoids and anthocyanins present, it will reflect both yellow and red light, appearing orange. Red leaves occur when the anthocyanin pigment is the only one left. “When these other chemicals begin to be observed, it gives us dazzling views and a very, very impressive panorama of colors,” said Shakhashiri. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The vivid display of colors in the trees in the fall is an illustration of the idea that everything we interact with can ultimately be reduced to the actions of molecules, Shakhashiri said. “It prompts an appreciation for the complexity of the beautiful, chemical world that we live in,” said Shakhashiri. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Big Read Books author Rebekah Taussig's gives her keynote address on "Sitting Pretty: The View from My Ordinary Resilient Disabled Body" on October 16, 2024. Photo by Emma Schieffer | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Conversations around disability reigned as Go Big Read author visited campus. Students hope it can stay this way Rebekah Taussig visited the University of Wisconsin-Madison for discussions on disability in classrooms, panels and in her keynote speech as part of the Go Big Read curriculum. By Bryna Goeking October 18, 2024 | 4:25pm CDT Dr. Rebekah Taussig, author of this year’s Go Big Read book “Sitting Pretty: The View from My Ordinary Resilient Disabled Body,” visited the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus for guided discussions about her story and experiences as a disabled person. At the keynote speech Wednesday night, Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin said the book has been integrated into 40 courses, with 9,000 copies distributed across campus. Taussig was emotional seeing the overfilled crowd, many of whom shared they had read her book. “I’m having kind of a surreal moment,” she said. “I’m just pausing over this and seeing your faces, and just want to thank you. It feels really big to me.” Taussig and Mnookin discussed the book and its larger connections to experiences surrounding disability. As a child in rural Kansas, Taussig said her experience in a wheelchair left her feeling like a “class pet” rather than a person. She recounted arriving on the bus for disabled students in elementary school and having her first stark experience with feeling othered. She talked about writing her book, specifically the uncomfortable chapters about her first time teaching about disability — an experience she recalled as like “jumping into an ice cold pool.” But these experiences of learning how to connect disability to others helped her frame how she wrote her book. “So many people are connected to this conversation from so many directions and in a way that I can’t anticipate, but I know how to anticipate you will be connected in some way,” Taussig said. Taussig will publish “We Are the Scrappy Ones” in April 2025, a children’s book celebrating children with disabilities. Disabled community unites on campus Disabled UW-Madison students, faculty and staff joined Taussig for a panel discussion on disability on campus Tuesday night. Students shared issues with housing, receiving accommodations and social issues caused by disability, thanking Taussig for helping to normalize these issues. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One panelist, student Brelynn Bille, mentioned the book chapter about dating as a disabled person. “It felt like I was the person that you wrote it for,” she said. “It’s exactly why we need more books on this and sharing that perspective because it helps to remove that otheringness.” At Wednesday’s address, one audience member, a sophomore in high school who is disabled, thanked Taussig for sharing her “complications of kindness” and said it helped her understand her own self-advocacy. Many times, Taussig echoed the importance of stories in understanding frameworks of oppression and change. “I am rather biased, but I do believe that stories are the way to change people’s thinking the most deeply and directly, in the most lasting ways,” she said. A ‘filtered’ experience One audience member asked Taussig about her experience navigating UW-Madison’s campus in a wheelchair Wednesday night. Taussig said her experience was “filtered,” with Go Big Read officials ensuring that all paths and elevators would be accessible. At Tuesday’s panel, students shared this isn’t always the case. One student, Emmett Lockwood, said they had lived in a building on campus where the elevator company had been out of business for 30 years, causing a delay in repair parts. Mnookin echoed this sentiment, noting that her husband works on the third floor of a building on campus without an elevator. She said that adding an elevator to this building would require a complete transformation, something the state Legislature and donors have not focused on. Panelist Brelynn Bille said UW-Madison “seems content with merely meeting the bare minimum [accessibility] requirements,” in an Instagram post. In the post, she shared that although Mnookin had previously told Bille that “she needs to hear these issues directly to advocate for them,” the chancellor was not present at the disabled students panel, which Bille called a “contradiction” and “disheartening.” At both the keynote address and disability panel, Taussig emphasized that disability advocacy does not end when she leaves, and lasting, oftentimes slow, change is needed to make institutional changes. “I get to come into these communities and these spaces where people have just read the book, and everybody's excited, and we're planning events around it, and then what happened?” Taussig said. “What do we do with the things that we learned?” “So I think part of it is thinking about how we can carry the things that we practice now in the future,” she said. “I think it's learning to do more of that and not just do it this one time.” A self-proclaimed lover of stories, Taussig asked the question: “what are the other books?” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Entrance to the Wisconsin Supreme Court in the State Capitol in Madison, WI. (Courtesy of Richard Hurd / Creative Commons) STATE NEWS ‘We better get this right’: Wisconsin Supreme Court hears oral arguments for 175-year-old abortion law A conservative attorney attempted to convince Wisconsin’s Supreme Court to uphold the state’s 1849 law that would ban abortion with no exception for rape or incest. By Lauren Eno November 14, 2024 | 11:50am CST A conservative prosecutor’s attorney struggled to convince the Wisconsin Supreme Court to reactivate the state’s 1849 law that previously banned abortion with no exception for rape or incest during oral arguments Monday. “We’re trying to figure out if medical providers here are going to be able to save women’s lives,” liberal-leaning Justice Jill Karofsky said Monday. “We better get this right.” Tensions were high during the two-hour session. Attorney Matthew Thome, representing Sheboygan County District Attorney Joel Urmanski, asked the court to overturn a lower court’s ruling that allowed abortion services to be provided in the state, drawing verbal backlash from the court’s liberal judges. Thome told the court he wasn’t arguing about the implications of the 1849 law, rather that the law can co-exist with a 1985 Wisconsin law that allows abortions before a fetus can survive outside the womb. Thomes said a ruling that says the 1985 law effectively repealed the 1849 law would be “anti-democratic.” “It’s a statute this Legislature has not repealed and you’re saying, no, you actually repealed it,” he said. Justice Rebecca Dallet rebuked Thome, telling him white men who passed the 1849 law held all the power at the time, and disregarding laws passed in the last 40 years would be undemocratic. “I fear what you are asking this court to do is sign the death warrant of women and children and pregnant people in this state,” Karofsky said. The history of abortion access in Wisconsin When the Supreme Court ended constitutional protections for the procedure in June 2022, an 1849 law banning abortions with no exception for rape or incest went into effect in Wisconsin, despite a majority of residents approving of abortion until viability. In 2022, Attorney General Josh Kaul challenged the 175-year-old law after Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin (PPWI) filed a petition asking the court to declare abortion access a right protected by the state constitution, arguing the 1985 law supersedes the ban, making the 1849 law null. Dane County Circuit Judge Diane Schlipper ruled in July 2023 the 1849 law does not prohibit consensual medical abortions, allowing PPWI to resume abortion services in the state. This ruling prompted Urmanski to ask the Wisconsin Supreme Court to take up the ruling. The court voted 4-3 along ideological lines to take up PPWI’s case and unanimously to take up Urmanski’s appeal. No oral arguments have been scheduled yet for the PPWI case. While a ruling isn’t expected from the Wisconsin Supreme Court for a few weeks, it is unlikely the 1849 law will be upheld by the court’s liberal majority. State News Editor Anna Kleiber contributed reporting to this article. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Katie Schiedt | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS ‘I’m safe and secure’: Missing Wisconsin man who faked his death found in Eastern Europe Watertown man Ryan Borgwardt confirmed he’s alive in Europe and talking to investigators but still unsure if he will return home, Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll said Thursday. By Jake Piper November 23, 2024 | 2:00am CST Ryan Borgwardt, the Watertown man who authorities believed faked his own death, has been communicating with investigators “almost daily” from Eastern Europe since Nov. 11, Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll said on Nov. 21. Investigators initially presumed Borgwardt dead after they discovered his overturned kayak in the heart of Green Lake. After 54 days of searching, investigators discovered Borgwardt had taken out a life insurance policy, made inquiries about moving funds to foreign bank accounts and obtained a new passport. Investigators hosted a press conference Nov. 8 in which they detailed the newly discovered evidence, along with their hypothesis that Borgwardt was still alive and in Eastern Europe. In the days following the press conference, Podoll said his team did a “blitz” of the phone numbers and emails they obtained from Borgwardt’s computer. After making contact with a “female who spoke Russian,” Podoll said the woman put Borgwardt in contact with authorities. “I’m safe and secure, no problem,” Borgwardt said in a video from an unknown location dated Nov. 11, shown at a Thursday press conference. Borgwardt told authorities that after dumping his phone and kayak in Green Lake, he rode a “child-sized inflatable boat” back to shore before riding an e-bike nearly 70 miles to Madison, where he boarded a Greyhound bus to Detroit. From there, investigators said he rode a bus to Canada and then flew out of the country. Borgwardt revealed that he fled the country for “personal matters” and “thought this was the right thing to do,” taking out a new $375,000 life insurance plan “for his family.” Borgwardt told investigators he chose Green Lake as the place to stage his death due to its status as the deepest natural lake in Wisconsin. Podoll said it “wasn’t in [Borgwardt’s] plan” to fake his own death but declined to comment on why he decided to, only saying Borgwardt didn’t leave the country out of fears for his personal safety. According to Podoll, he appeared to “express remorse” for “what he's put his family through the past several months,” along with the amount of man hours and money put into finding him. Borgwardt also said he didn’t anticipate investigators would search for him for “more than two weeks” in their initial investigation into his supposed death. Borgwardt has not made contact with his family in the 10 days since authorities first contacted him, according to officials. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email John Gross, Clinical Associate Professor of law at the University of Wisconsin-Madison told WMTV 15 News that while faking death is not a crime on its own, Borgwardt could be charged with an attempted fraudulent insurance claim, a Class I felony in Wisconsin. Other charges for Borgwardt are still up in the air, with Podoll saying the possibility of a local “obstructing charge,” federal charges and $35,000 to $40,000 in restitution payments await Borgwardt if he returns home. But Podoll told reporters that Borgwardt’s biggest concern about returning was how the community would react. Investigators said they were still working to bring Borgwardt back home. “Christmas is coming, and what better gift could he give his kids than to be there for Christmas with them,” Podoll said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Dane County executive signs 2025 budget proposal to increase housing and service opportunities Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn signed the 2025 Dane County budget, focusing on investing in families and the community. By Marin Rosen November 11, 2024 | 1:10pm CST Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn signed the 2025 Dane County budget Nov. 4, that will focus on affordable housing and access to community services alongside the Dane County Board of Supervisors. Kuhn’s budget proposal totals $926 million. The operating budget is $813 million while the capital plan is $112 million, a nearly 7% decrease from 2024. The cut in spending is a result of pandemic-era federal aid expiring. The proposed tax rate is $2.57 per $1,000 of equalized value, down from $2.73 in 2024 and the lowest it has been since 2010. “This budget prioritizes community needs by identifying and funding gaps in services while ensuring we are good stewards of taxpayer dollars,” Kuhn said in a Nov. 4 release. County Board Chair Patrick Miles said the 2025 budget is a “reflection of the values and priorities we all have to serve the Dane County community.” Highlights of Kuhn’s 2025 budget proposal include: Over $30 million for housing and housing supports. Enhance access for veterans to programs they are eligible for. Additional capacity for services in Adult Protective Services for those in need. Funds to establish a Dementia Care Stabilization Unit. Increase language access in multiple departments to county services. Increase support for reentry and jail diversion programs. $10 million commitment to the Dane County Conservation Fund. Investments to the Alliant Energy Center campus and funding for next steps of the Exposition Hall expansion. $16.6 million in county highway projects across the County. $2 million in capital financing to expand access to Sunshine Place, a community resource hub serving eastern Dane County. Newly elected Dane County Executive Melissa Agard will have the power to approve or veto the finalized budget proposal once in office. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Underly's budget proposal is a bold step toward strengthening Wisconsin's public education Underly’s plan, prioritizing special education, per-student funding increases and property tax relief, is a substantial and badly needed investment in the future of Wisconsin. By Maya Morvis November 21, 2024 | 5:00am CST Jill Underly, Wisconsin’s state superintendent, recently unveiled a budget proposal that could make a significant difference for public education in Wisconsin. The proposal, totaling over $3 billion in new funding, aims to address funding gaps that have limited school resources for students, teachers and communities. Underly’s plan, which prioritizes special education, per-student funding increases, property tax relief and grants, is a substantial and badly needed investment in the future of Wisconsin. This proposal represents a chance to build a stronger public education system that will keep pace with rising costs. Underly's plan ties funding increases to inflation, making it easier for schools to maintain quality education without needing local tax increases or frequent referendums to cover basic expenses. By offering state-level support, this proposal will relieve financial pressure on local communities, making funding for education more stable and reliable. It will also advance equitable and inclusive education by significantly increasing special education funding, which would help schools meet state mandates while supporting students with disabilities. For students, these changes would mean better access to essential resources, especially for those in special education programs and low-income households. The proposed increase in the special education reimbursement rate — from 32% to 90% over three years — would provide much-needed funding to cover costs for critical services. This increase would allow districts to offer better support to students with disabilities, enhancing their educational experience and opportunities. The rise in per-student funding would mean schools can improve or maintain essential services, technology, classroom resources and educational programs that benefit all students. Families would also feel the positive effects of this plan. By capping property tax increases to an average of 1.5% over the next two years, Underly’s proposal would help control local tax rates while ensuring that schools still receive necessary funding. For families in low-income brackets, additional financial support for their children in schools through per-student aid increases and the extra 20% in funding for students in poverty would help reduce inequities and offer better educational opportunities. Programs funded through the Out-of-School-Time Grant, aimed at reducing chronic absenteeism, would provide added support to keep students engaged, which is particularly helpful for working families who rely on after-school programs. While Underly's proposal seems promising, some critics argue the increase in state-level funding could shift too much responsibility away from local communities. They argue that local school districts should have more control over their budgets and how money is allocated, rather than relying heavily on state-imposed funding structures. Additionally, some have raised concerns the plan's reliance on capping property taxes may not be sustainable in the long run, potentially leading to future budget deficits or the need for future tax increases to balance the books. While the proposal aims to provide more equitable education, the overall economic feasibility of funding such initiatives without raising taxes in the future remains a contentious issue. However, Underly’s proposal could lead to long-term benefits for Wisconsin’s educational system that outweigh these concerns. With sustainable funding, better resources for students and more financial support for families, the state can work toward creating a more equitable, well-resourced and inclusive education system. This investment in education is an investment in Wisconsin’s future workforce and community, helping ensure that all students have the opportunity to thrive and succeed. Maya Morvis is a sophomore studying Journalism and Political Science. Do you agree that State Superintendent Jill Underly’s budget proposal is good for Wisconsin schools? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball wins first conference series against the Buckeyes Wisconsin Badgers softball won their first conference series against the Ohio State Buckeyes at home. By Abby Shulman April 16, 2024 | 4:36pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Ohio State Buckeyes at home on April 12-14, doubling their scores for the first two games before losing the third in an overall series win. First home victory The Badgers started their high-powered 8-4 win with top-of-the-lineup infielder Fiona Girardot drilling the ball to center. Still in the bottom of the first, catcher Emmy Wells took the plate for another solo homer to establish an early 2-0 lead. Starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo’s groove slipped in the third, giving up three runs and Wisconsin’s lead. However, the Badgers’ defense was clean for the rest of the game, including multiple double plays, with shortstop Ava Kuszak fashionably diving into the outfield to prevent another Buckeye hit. The Badgers tied the game 3-3 in the fourth when infielder Ellie Hubbard’s double drove outfielder Brooke Kuffel home, and Wisconsin got back on top soon after in the fifth. The five-run inning’s scoring kicked off with two outs when outfielder Peyton Bannon took the plate, bases loaded. Her single locked in two runners, followed by Kuffel’s launch that drove in three more. The Buckeyes got one more run in but could not compete with the Badgers’ eight runs, five of which were from the three home runs. Securing the series win Wisconsin won 10-5 Saturday, once again doubling Ohio State’s score. Wells hit another bomb in the first, this time a three-run homer to secure a 3-0 lead. Their supremacy increased to 4-0 in the third after a sacrifice fly. Thanks to two Badger throwing errors, the Buckeyes scored two in the fourth and one in the fifth off relief pitcher Shelby Jacobson before Magnanimo took over the close 4-3 game. Just like the day before, the Badgers bounced back in the fifth to make it a six-run inning. Between Kuszak’s two-run smash hit, Bannon’s two-run RBI double, Hubbard’s RBI triple and outfielder Molly Schlosser’s RBI, the Badgers were unstoppable. Despite letting up a two-run home run from the Buckeyes in the seventh, the Badgers still wrapped up the first two games with 20 hits and a total score of 18-9. Defeated in the series finale Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin couldn’t keep up its success in Sunday's game, ultimately losing 9-5 after a series of errors. The Badgers led until the fifth, behind RBIs from Kuffel and Kuszak in the first. Kuszak continued her outburst of a series, hammering the ball for a solo homer in the third in a 3-1 rally. Both teams scored in the fourth, with Bannon representing the Badgers when she raced home after infielder Alivia Bark squeeze bunted. But it was the Buckeyes’ turn to secure the win with a six-run fifth inning that capitalized on errors and singles. The Badgers saw one more run — an RBI from Bannon — that only cut their deficit to 9-5. Now sitting at .395, Wisconsin will take the road to play Minnesota in a doubleheader on Wednesday, April 17th. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Material Intelligence exhibit. Photo courtesy of Center for Design and Material Culture. ARTS UW ‘Material Intelligence’ exhibit threads meaning into matter “Material Intelligence” exhibit in the School of Human Ecology invites individuals to think about how materials shape the spaces around us. By Lillian Mihelich November 21, 2024 | 3:00am CST When you walk into the School of Human Ecology's Ruth Davis Design Gallery from now until March 9, you'll be greeted with materials of all kinds — cascading, thread art installations, glass sculptures, funky chairs and more — each demonstrating how humans shape our world through materials. The “Material Intelligence” exhibit, free to the public, is a culmination of materials that we use as humans, innovators and adaptors that shape our physical surroundings, inspired by the Material Intelligence online publication. This exhibit in particular, explores two materials: glass in a research, educational and museum-style display as well as threads in a more gallery-style manner. “Materials can help us think about an artist's practice and vision, materials can help us think about glass as a research material — the ‘Material Intelligence’ idea can contain all of those, and we wanted to show that both through the work we display and how we display that work,” said Sarah Ann Carter, material intelligence curator and executive director of the Center for Design and Material Culture. On the left side of the exhibit, “Threads: Natural Fibers and Living Lines,” a linen and fiber display, showcases the work of Ann Coddington, fiber artist and professor emeritus from Eastern Illinois University. Coddington devotes a lot of her time to her studio practice, teaching and creating designs that practices up to hundred-of-thousands of years old. “It’s really interesting to be engaging in a practice with such an ancient history in this current, sort of modern, digital age and extend that practice into the future,” Coddington told The Daily Cardinal. Coddington's art presents in dynamic ways, embodying movement and sculptures that emerge from natural fibers. Her portion of the exhibit is more gallery-style, the artwork is spread out between groups of objects so that you can look at her work as their own, individual pieces of art, according to Carter. “Ann Coddington's beautiful, poetic and evocative work in ‘Threads’ helps us think about another kind of material, in this case linen, which can be transformed into the different kinds of sculptures of work in a totally different way,” Carter said. Net-like figures hang from the ceiling, and the threaded designs come in a range of sizes and styles. Some have large gaps in between, like a group of hanging nets, and some are tightly threaded sculptures. Coddington's "Little Arm” sculpture explores her relationship with her daughter and the feeling of being far apart. Paying homage to the title of the exhibit, Coddington has created a piece called "Work in Progress,” which she will continue to work on throughout its duration. "I think it’s nice for the viewer to be able to see the construction of it,” Coddington said. “That technique is called twining; it’s an off-loom weaving process. We usually think of weaving like a loom, and it’s very similar to that except it’s not loom-based.” Coddington will teach this technique at an upcoming workshop. On the right side of the exhibit, glass adorns the “Spheres of Influence” portion, which explores how glassmakers, glass inventions and glassblowers have impacted the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s education and life. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email There's a captivating spread of sculptural invertebrates from the 1800s, fashioned by a German father-and-son duo Leopold and Rudolph Blaschka, who developed the Blaschka models. The sculptures were recreated by professional glass blowers and are on loan from the UW-Madison Zoological Museum. There’s also stones from UW-Madison’s Geology Museum and lantern teaching slides from UW-Madison's Astronomy department. In the back of the exhibit sits a Work in Progress Lab, where viewers can find directions for starting projects like crochet, mending, felting and beyond. "We're thinking hard about how we can slow down visitors experiences in a gallery — creating an experience where people want to come in, look around, maybe learn something, maybe look around, maybe get excited and then be incited to sit down, maybe connect with people and think about objects in the world around us,” Carter said. The “Material Intelligence” exhibit is supported by the Chipstone Foundation, the Anonymous Fund, The UW-Madison School of Education Impact 2030 Helen Burish Fund, the UW-Madison Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research with funding from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and the Marilynn R. Baxter Fund. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Tony Casteñeda, center, and his band play a Thursday evening set at the Cardinal Bar Photo by Rowan Fields | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Meet Tony Casteñeda, Madison’s Latin jazz king After five decades, Tony Casteñeda continues to play the genre he jumpstarted in Madison. By Jacob Szczap October 17, 2024 | 4:00am CDT As late afternoon turned to dusk on an October day in Madison, Tony Casteñeda settled into his Thursday evening routine. It involves jamming along on the bongos and congas in the back room of the Cardinal Bar with the five-piece Latin jazz band he leads, the Tony Casteñeda Latin Jazz Band. Thursday is Latin music night at the Cardinal, and keeping rhythm on the drums, Casteñeda’s hands bang away to the Afro-Cuban rhythms while the rest of the band creates an excitingly smooth and exotic sound, bringing the genre of Latin jazz to Madison. “I just love the music, and I love the vibe,” Casteñeda said. Casteñeda, 68, is Madison’s godfather of Latin jazz. He came to the city in 1974 to study at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and in 1977 became a founding member of Olmeca, Madison’s first Latin jazz band. The group played for over 20 years before Casteñeda formed his own group, which has been playing together since 1998. Along the way, he’s forged a path greater than music. A social justice advocate, radio and podcast host and bartender among other gigs, the laid-back Casteñeda is a true jack of all trades. Through a variety of avenues, he has become a true and inviting local figure. Originally from Racine, Wisconsin, Casteñeda got his start in music through his uncle, who played in a Latin orchestra band when he was growing up. When Casteñeda was in fifth grade, his uncle bought him a trumpet, his first instrument. By high school he had a conga drum, teaching himself to beat on to the records of Santana. A few years later when Casteñeda was at UW-Madison, his band Olmeca played on as a live band in the era of disco. With a weekly gig at State Street Infirmary, Olmeca built the foundation for live Latin jazz in Madison. “I wanna say he’s kind of a pioneer,” said Anders Svanoe, the saxophonist in Tony’s band and a leader of multiple other musical groups in Madison, referring to Madison’s Latin jazz culture. “He sort of started that whole scene.” These days, Casteñeda and his band play every Thursday night at the recently reopened Cardinal Bar, with plenty of other gigs scattered in between. This night in the historical bar’s swanky back room, it’s Casteñeda on the bongos and congas, Svanoe belting out melodies and improvisations on the saxophone, Arno Gonzalez providing a Latin percussion flair on the timbales, Dave Stoler bouncing around the keys on the keyboard and Henry Boehm holding the fort down with technique on the double bass. Louka Patenaude also plays with the group, on guitar. In between songs, Casteñeda casually converses with the evening crowd, appearing like there’s nowhere he’d rather be. Before he was Madison’s Latin jazz king, Casteñeda found his footing on the political scene. Arriving in Madison in the mid 1970s, the political climate was still plenty hot on campus. Casteñeda became involved with Mecha, then UW-Madison’s Chicano student organization and fought for a Chicano studies department, which he remembers as a “big struggle.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “There was a lot of political activity at the time,” Casteñeda said. “I’m still involved, and everyone does their part.” Olmeca played together until the late 1990s, and Tony started his own band in 1998, with much of the group still together. The band had a rollicking years-long Sunday night run at the Cardinal, where they would play in front of crowded, cigarette-hazed rooms full of dancers deep into the night. They’ve opened for legendary acts such as Poncho Sanchez and John Santos and have won plenty of local awards. “We’ve been together for a long time, and I really appreciate the loyalty, the commitment that the guys have to the band,” Casteñeda said. At the Cardinal bar, his band seamlessly merged Afro-Cuban rhythms with jazz into a free-flowing, deeply enjoyable sound. Perhaps it’s his laid-back demeanor or his do-anything attitude, but Casteñeda’s decades-long run in Madison has come by no accident. As his invigorating set of Latin jazz came to an energetic end, the Cardinal warmed up. During Latin jazz night, the crowd was fulfilled. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Melissa Farquhar and Erin McGlynn, UW-Madison professional students, headed to Houston last Wednesday to assist efforts to remove the vast number of mosquitoes caused by Hurricane Harvey. OPINION Storm Warning: Hurricanes Helene and Milton are reshaping the upcoming election The recent hurricanes have heightened voter awareness of climate challenges, increasing pressure on candidates to address environmental issues as November approaches. By Hayley Froseth October 17, 2024 | 3:00am CDT In late September, Hurricane Helene tore through the states of Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia and Tennessee. Helene demolished areas typically safe from hurricanes and became the deadliest mainland hurricane since Katrina in 2005. Florida residents are now recovering from a second hit from Hurricane Milton, which caused an estimated $50 billion in damage, according to the Biden administration. The tragic reality of Helene and Milton is that despite attempts at preventative disaster relief, the storms arrived before we were ready. As a result, lives were lost, homes were destroyed and extensive reconstruction efforts are now underway. We've grown used to this cycle, yet our country remains unprepared to handle increasingly severe weather. With November approaching, voters on either side of the aisle must consider a new issue as they head to the polls: disaster response. Voters can’t ignore the implications of disasters like Helene and Milton, no matter where they fall on the political spectrum. This makes the government’s disaster response a main factor influencing the opinions of voters, shining a heavy spotlight on the Federal Emergency Management Agency. As of Saturday, FEMA has responded to the disasters with $441 million in assistance for Helene survivors and $349 million for public rebuilding of communities and their infrastructure allocated to affected states. This allows impacted communities to apply for aid from federal funding alongside the more than 10,000 government personnel on the ground helping to mitigate the damages. While it's too early to assess whether FEMA's response is sufficient, it's no secret that the Biden administration — and in turn, Vice President Kamala Harris — will be held accountable for its effectiveness. In the critical final weeks of her campaign, Harris can’t afford a slow road to recovery, as delays could jeopardize her standing amidst national turmoil. On top of uncertainty surrounding the effectiveness of FEMA's response, disinformation about Hurricanes Helene and Milton creates a new dangerous situation for survivors seeking aid. Key swing states, heavily impacted by the storms, have seen unfounded rumors, such as claims that the hurricanes were man-made to influence the election and Trump's false assertions that Washington withheld funds for Southeast restoration efforts. Amid this disinformation, Harris addressed a church gathering in North Carolina this past Sunday, condemning those who “play politics with other people's heartbreak” and urging bipartisan cooperation instead. Given Harris’ direct association with the Biden administration’s performance in disaster recovery, disinformation surrounding Helene and Milton risks damage to her image while also undermining the importance of climate change initiatives in the upcoming presidential term. Not only will the Biden administration’s response to Helene and Milton shake up Harris’ campaign, but the right response to these severe weather events could lead voters to prioritize climate policy on the ballot this November. In response, the vice presidential debate between Ohio Sen. JD Vance and Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz held in the aftermath of Hurricane Helene was largely focused on climate change, compared to the last two presidential debates that barely touched the subject. The bottom line is this election cycle has seen federal disaster response and climate change issues rise to the forefront of the 2024 presidential campaigns. This focus not only underscores the urgency of challenges like the increased frequency of extreme weather, disinformation and disaster recovery preparedness, but it also instills hope that future administrations will prioritize the implementation of climate policies. That’s why student voters at University of Wisconsin-Madison must bring their understanding of human-induced climate change and the cyclical nature of disasters to the polls. If voters hold candidates accountable for their strategies, there becomes an incentive for political actors to develop resilient, sustainable solutions to climate threats. With nearly 42 million Gen Z voters nationwide, including 7.8 million in key states, young voters are increasingly engaged through university voter registration efforts and are taking stronger stances on climate issues, especially after Helene and Milton. Candidates are responding by investing in social media ads and campus rallies in swing states like we saw last month in Wisconsin. This renewed focus on climate change may benefit Harris’ campaign and offer hope for future administrations to prioritize environmental action. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The tragedy of Helene and Milton goes beyond the devastation they caused. We knew this was coming, yet we failed to act — extreme weather events are now an inevitable part of our future that continues to be ignored. With the urgency of climate change more evident than ever, the choices we make at the ballot will shape not only our immediate disaster response but also the long-term survival of our planet. The time for accountability is now. Our future depends on it. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Hayley FrosethStaff Writer More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo courtesy of WIHEDC STATE NEWS Wisconsin's first Indigenous economic, housing conference aims to boost Native communities Thirty-two Native-owned businesses received $5,000 grant awards at a conference held by the Wisconsin Indigenous Housing and Economic Development Corporation. By Clara Strecker November 14, 2024 | 6:00am CST Wisconsin’s first conference devoted to Indigenous economic and housing development brought entrepreneurs together Thursday and Friday to address gaps in Wisconsin’s Indigenous communities. The two-day conference, hosted by the Wisconsin Indigenous Housing and Economic Development Corporation (WIHEDC), took place in Bowler, Wisconsin, and served as a space for Indigenous entrepreneurs, tribal leadership and economic development professionals to collaborate and share ideas on how to better invest in their communities, for example aiding small businesses and housing initiatives. The event also focused on two studies addressing economic impact and housing needs. Many families in tribal communities live in overcrowded homes, WIHEDC CEO Fern Orie told The Daily Cardinal. The study aims to see what the needs are and develop solutions on how to tackle this crisis, beginning with affordable housing. Economic impact study The WIHEDC is conducting a new project to evaluate and display contributions of “Non-Gaming tribal entities and Indigenous small businesses to the state of Wisconsin,” according to their website. “We did a study, the first of its kind, highlighting all of the Native-owned businesses in Wisconsin and gathering data about what kind of businesses are out there, what kind of work and services they provide and really just gathering it into a native small business directory,” Orie stated. The WIHEDC collected data from tribal corporations, indigenous businesses and nonprofit organizations. To further engage with communities, they also visited tribal reservations. The study will allow the corporation to create a database, which in turn can be used to create economic development and policy initiatives supporting tribal communities in Wisconsin. Orie told the Cardinal she hopes the study will help highlight opportunities in workforce development and encourage investment in Wisconsin’s Indigenous communities. “This was kind of the first swoop of gathering data and pulling in all the non-gaming enterprises from tribes, along with trying to get as many of our Native entrepreneurs to provide data but really showcasing the work, the impact and the landscape out there in tribal economic development,” Orie said. Going hand-in-hand with the economic development plan, the conference was able to provide awards to small businesses. During the conference, 32 Native-owned businesses received a $5,000 business grant award. “It all ties together with opportunity, right? We’re providing opportunities for Native-owned businesses to showcase the work they do,” Orie told the Cardinal. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Wisconsin Native Homeownership Coalition’s housing study The WIHEDC will also conduct the Wisconsin Native Homeownership housing study, an analysis aimed at providing insights into the current state of Indigenous housing development in Wisconsin in order to address housing gaps in Native communities. The coalition is expanding from Wisconsin to the regional Great Lakes states, Orie said. The WIHEDC recognizes the lack of affordable housing in America, which Orie said is amplified in tribal communities, as families already live in congested housing with many extended families living together. “How do we tackle and address these housing challenges? … starting with having enough housing stock to house our families and then addressing affordability. We need affordable housing,” Orie said. The WIHEDC will hold a session at the annual WHEDA conference next week in Madison, where they will present more results from their studies. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Clara StreckerClara Strecker is a copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She also covers state news. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal The Badgers quarterback announced his intentions to enter the transfer portal. By Tomer Ronen December 11, 2024 | 2:12pm CST Wisconsin Badgers quarterback Braedyn Locke announced his intention to enter the NCAA transfer portal with two years of eligibility remaining Wednesday. The sophomore from Rockwall, Texas, started nine games in 2024, passing for 1,936 yards, 13 touchdowns and 10 interceptions after Tyler Van Dyke was ruled out for the season to injury against Alabama. “Thank you to the University of Wisconsin, the coaches, and my teammates for an unforgettable two years,” Locke said on Twitter Wednesday. “I’ll always cherish my time here.” Locke started three games in 2023 after starting quarterback Tanner Mordecai went down against Iowa. He threw an interception in all but one start in 2024, leading the team to a 3-6 record as the starter. Locke’s younger brother, three-star quarterback Landyn Locke, signed his letter of intent with the Badgers on Dec. 4, leaving optimism the sophomore might stay. The Badgers’ projected quarterback room consists of true freshman Mabrey Mettauer and 2025 recruits Carter Smith and Landyn Locke. Locke is the third Badgers quarterback to enter the portal following Van Dyke and redshirt freshman Cole LaCrue. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80
Photo by Shane Fruchterman | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS ‘Hide your moms, not your ballots’: Yung Gravy to visit Madison Wednesday to encourage early voting The rapper and UW-Madison alum is teaming up with event company Daybreaker to encourage voter participation on campus ahead of the election. By Jake Piper October 22, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Rapper Yung Gravy will return to Madison on Oct. 23 as part of a nationwide “Party to the Polls” tour, encouraging voter participation ahead of the election. The rapper will perform, lead a parade to Memorial Union and host a meet and greet. The “Party to the Polls Purple Tour” is a nationwide, nonpartisan event sponsored by Daybreaker that aims to encourage voter participation in the upcoming election through “dance parties celebrating democracy.” Yung Gravy will perform at Liquid Madison from noon to 1 p.m. on Wednesday. At 1 p.m. Gravy and a brass band will lead a parade of voters to Memorial Union’s early voting polls. Free Ian’s Pizza and Paul’s Pel’meni will be served for lunch and voters will be met with both “poll” and “pole” dancers on arrival. Afterward, Gravy will host a meet and greet for voters on the library mall side of Memorial Union. “This is the purple tour — whether you are blue or red, we welcome all to collectively dance with Yung Gravy and follow him in a musical procession to the polls,” event coordinator and Co-Founder of Daybreaker Eli Clark-Davis told The Daily Cardinal. The event will be hosted by District 2 Ald. Juliana Bennett and District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan. “The goal of this event is to make voting easy and fun for everyone,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal. Yung Gravy most recently performed in Madison at the 2022 Taste of Madison festival. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S HOCKEY Men’s hockey nets 11 goals in one weekend during first sweep of the season The Wisconsin men’s hockey team earned their first series sweep of the season, defeating the No.18 Penn State in overtime on Friday and in regulation on Saturday. By Katherine McGrann November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST The Wisconsin Badgers men’s hockey team (4-8) swept Penn State (4-5) in their two-game series this weekend, extending their win streak against the Nittany Lions to seven straight wins. Several players scored for the Badgers in their overtime win on Friday and 6-3 regulation win on Saturday in University Park, Pennsylvania. Friday Wisconsin defeated Penn State 5-4 in overtime on Friday night at Pegula Ice Arena. The two teams battled, scoring back-and-forth goals, but the Badgers prevailed in the end. Forward graduate student Ryland Mosley struck first for the Badgers three minutes into the first period. Sophomore forward Quinn Finley intercepted an attempted breakout pass at the top of the circle and shot the puck. Mosley redirected Finley’s shot, tapping the puck past Penn State goaltender Arsenni Sergeev. Penn State tied the game with one minute remaining in the first period on the power play. Sophomore forward Sawyer Scholl scored his first goal of the season to put the Badgers up in the second period. Graduate defender Anthony Keherer’s shot rebounded off of Sergeev, and Scholl was right there to put the puck away. With about three minutes left in the second period, graduate student Cody Laskosky tallied his first goal of the season. Laskosky’s wrist shot from the circle soared into the top of the net past Sergeev. Laskosky’s goal added to the Badgers’ lead, 3-1. Despite Laskosky’s insurance goal, the Nittany Lions started the third period off hot, scoring just one minute and 43 seconds in to close the Badgers' lead by one. Penn State senior forward Ben Schoen tied the game shortly after. Freshman forward Ryan Botterill reclaimed a 4-3 lead for the Badgers, scoring his second goal of the season. Penn State’s defense took Scholl down in the neutral zone, forcing him to lose the puck. Junior forward Simon Tassy picked up the loose puck at the red line and passed it to Botterill at the top of the circle. Botterill took a wrist shot, beating Sergeev over his left pad. With this, Scholl set his single-game career high at three points. The Badgers lost their 4-3 lead with 50 seconds remaining in the third after Mosley entered the box for a holding penalty. Penn State pulled their goaltender to give themselves a six-on-four advantage on the powerplay. Penn State’s Danny Dzhaniyev beat Badger goaltender Tommy Scarfone on his left side to tie the game 4-4 and force overtime. The Badgers went into their sixth overtime of the season after their 2-3 OT loss to the Minnesota Gophers last weekend. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email With a minute and 12 seconds remaining in overtime, senior defender Daniel Laatsch picked up a wide shot from Penn State, creating a two-on-one breakaway. Laatsch took a shot to the left side of the net that sailed over Sergeev’s right pad, marking his second game-winning overtime goal of the year and sixth career goal. Laatsch also had five blocked shots for the Badgers. The Badgers were outshot by the Nittany Lions 36-28 and went 43% on the faceoff circle. Wisconsin had five penalties and was successful on three penalty kills. Penn State had three power play opportunities, while Badgers didn’t capitalize on any. Securing the sweep on Saturday The Badgers completed their series sweep in their 6-3 defeat to Penn State on Saturday. The Badgers opened the floodgates, scoring four goals in the game’s first nine minutes. Junior forward Kyle Kukkonen lit the lamp for the Badgers first, scoring 40 seconds into the first period off an intercepted pass from the Penn State goaltender. Kukkonen took a shot from the far right side at the top of the circle, beating Sergeev over his right shoulder to put the Badgers up early. Just over two minutes later, Finley collected his eighth goal of the season. Freshman defenseman Logan Hensler caught the puck on the right side of the boards, passing the puck down to Mosley. Mosley passed the puck back to Hensler, who took a shot that Penn State goaltender Sergeev blocked. Finley was waiting at the back door and finished it off to put the Badgers up 2-0. After the second Badger goal, the Nittany Lions switched goaltenders to Noah Granan. Four minutes later, junior forward Christian Fitzgerald struck, scoring his first goal of the season. Fitzgerald retrieved the puck off a missed shot to make his way into the slot. After faking a shot, Fitzgerald slid the puck past Grannan. The Badgers made it 4-0 only 42 seconds after Fitzgerald’s goal. The Badgers were on a two-on-one rush, Dyck with the puck and Laskosky to the right of him. Dyck let a shot rip at the left circle hashes, hitting the top right corner. The Nittany Lions gained momentum coming into the second period, with Jarod Crespo scoring 48 seconds into the period on a three-on-one, beating Scarfone on the right side. Charlie Cerrato scored his second goal of the series for Penn State, pushing a rebound in to make it a 4-2 game. The Nittany Lions slimmed the goal differential margin to one with Aiden Fink scoring on a wrist shot with 11:34 remaining in the third period. With 8:36 remaining in the third period, Penn State’s sophomore forward Matt DiMarsico received a major penalty for boarding. With the advantage, freshman forward Gavin Morrissey passed the puck to Finley to break into the Penn State defensive zone. Finley skated the puck down the left side and found Mosley alone in front of Grannan. Mosley capitalized on the five-minute major only 23 seconds into the power play, beating Grannan over his left shoulder for his second goal of the weekend. Laskosky netted his second goal of the series and the Badgers’ sixth goal of the night with 57 seconds left on the power play and about four minutes remaining in the third period. Morrissey passed the puck across the Penn State defensive zone to Finley who took a shot that was redirected by Laskosky, earning Wisconsin’s 6-3 lead. The Wisconsin Badgers handed the No. 18 Nittany Lions their first two-game series sweep losses of the season at home. The Badgers will be back in Madison at the Kohl Center on Nov. 29 and Nov.30. The puck drops at 7 p.m. Friday and 8 p.m. Saturday. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Cage The Elephant performs at Bonnaroo in 2017. Photo courtesy of Thornton Drury/Wikimedia Commons ARTS Breaking down the bold vibes of Cage the Elephant’s ‘Neon Pill’ Cage the Elephant’s newest album is another solid release from the band after a five-year hiatus. By Arin Chandra November 26, 2024 | 2:00am CST The American rock band Cage the Elephant has garnered well-deserved praise for breathing new life into the music genre, and this remains true after the release of their 6th album “Neon Pill.” After the release of “Social Cues” in 2019, the band went silent as lead singer Matt Schulz found himself in an internal battle with psychosis and getting arrested for bringing loaded firearms to a hotel. Their latest album is an eclectic mix of melancholia, hope and raw emotional confessions. Each track offers a glimpse into the band’s struggles and triumphs, with Schulz recounting his vulnerabilities, anchoring the album’s narrative. Although it isn’t as catchy or consistent as the band’s previous work, Neon Pill stands as a solid entry in their discography. Opening the album, “HiFi (True Light)” sets a melancholic tone while introducing listeners to the band’s evolving sound. Its steady rhythm and subtle introspection paves the way for the emotional depth that follows. An energetic anthem, "Rainbow" offers an uplifting contrast to the darker moments of the album. Its hopeful lyrics remind listeners of the light that can pierce through life’s shadows, making it one of the album’s standout tracks. It also formally introduces Schulz’s struggles with trying to find happiness within his battle with mental health, again contributing to a bittersweet mood throughout the song. The title track “Neon Pill” is a deeply personal exploration of Schulz’s struggles, including his highly publicized arrest. With high-energy beats and poignant lyrics, it tackles themes of addiction and resilience, delivering a strong message of overcoming adversity and self-complicity. The track serves as a gateway between the introductory melancholic mood of the first part of the album and the more emotionally riveting moments of the second part. “Out Loud,” perhaps the most emotionally raw track, feels like a personal confession from Schulz with lyrics that do not necessarily feel songlike. Slower and more intimate, it explores themes of regret and redemption, standing out as the album’s most moving moment. An addictive earworm, "Good Time" is the album’s most infectious track. Its catchy chorus and upbeat instrumentals offer a welcome reprieve from the heavier themes, representing Schulz’s fleeting moments of happiness. It also captures a bit of the nostalgia behind the heavy instrumentals featured in previous albums, whereas “Neon Pill” prefers to be more intimate with its lyrics. “Silent Picture” blends uplifting instrumentals with lyrics that touch on the pain of being unseen in moments of suffering, described as suffocation. The track also represents the loss of friends and growing out of touch with loved ones due to self-negligence. Its optimistic instrumental and cohesive sound make it a memorable addition to the album. Closing the album, "Over Your Shoulder" offers a moving instrumental backdrop to Schulz’s reflective lyrics. With heavy guitar chords and bass drums, it feels formulaic yet fitting, tying together the themes of loss and acceptance. It also serves as a nostalgic window to the band’s early days of producing music with simple instrumentals but convincing lyrics, giving listeners old and new something to appreciate as the album ends. Generally, “Neon Pill” features symbolic songs that capture Schulz’s struggles with acceptance, addiction and being caged in more ways than one. “Shy Eyes,” “Float Into The Sky” and “Metaverse” all serve to emphasize the bittersweet nature of reality and the ever-growing need for escapism, accompanied by exceptional instrumental and vocal performances. Still, it still suffers from a few albums that are below the band’s average. “Ball and Chain” has weaker messaging because of its focus on its incorporation of an improvised and reckless instrumental. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Same” features a much more repetitive strain that succeeds more in messaging but less so in the compositional department. While these tracks are not bad by any means, they happen to fall short of the highs of the album and of the band as a whole. Overall, “Neon Pill” is a cohesive and deeply personal project, with each track contributing to the emotional mosaic of Cage the Elephant’s journey. It’s a testament to the band’s ability to evolve while staying true to their raw, emotive roots. Although it is not as strong as the band’s other albums in terms of instrumental power and catchiness, the themes of self-struggle and acceptance ring true in their latest work. It marks another addition to their impressive and unique discography and is a solid return to form after a five-year hiatus. Rating: 7/10 - Good Best songs: “Good Time,” “Neon Pill,” “Rainbow,” “Out Loud,” “Silent Picture” Weakest song: “Ball and Chain” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Badgers don’t bother trying against Minnesota, fail to become bowl-eligible No, it wasn’t a dragon. The Wisconsin Badgers’ football team was slayed by a squad of Minnesota Golden Gophers. By Tomer Ronen December 2, 2024 | 12:15pm CST The honey badger is known for its tendency to play dead when wounded. On Friday, the Wisconsin Badgers (5-7) let themselves be killed off by the Minnesota Golden Gophers (7-5). It was a fitting end to a miserable second season for Luke Fickell — who fell to 12-13 as Wisconsin’s head coach after the 24-7 home loss — lifeless, uninteresting, cold and limp. The Badgers put up no fight in attempting to keep their 22-year bowl streak, the third-longest (now no longer) active in the country, alive against their border rivals, finishing the season with an empty cabinet for the first time since the team added a third trophy game in 2014 in what was a game full of “firsts.” The first five-game losing streak since 1991. The first Badgers team to lose Paul Bunyan’s Axe three of four times to Minnesota since 1990. And, somehow, the first and only start for quarterback Braedyn Locke without an interception this season. Don’t worry, Locke didn’t look any better than usual. The coldest game at Camp Randall since 1964 started off slow, with one first down between the two teams in four drives. A 37-yard strike from Gophers quarterback Max Brosmer to wide receiver Daniel Jackson warmed Minnesota up, propelling them into Badgers territory. A Brosmer touchdown run near the end of the first quarter gave them a lead they never relinquished. It seemed as though the Badgers were ready to roll over and let the season come to an end. Jackson consistently beat star cornerback Ricardo Hallman, and running back Darius Taylor gashed the once-fearsome Badger front-seven for 143 yards. Later in the second quarter, a 40-yard Marcus Major run off a fake tush push put the Gophers in scoring position. Even after Brosmer connected with Jackson in the end zone to give the Gophers a 14-0 lead, the Badgers had a chance late in the first half. Receiving the ball first to start the second half gave Wisconsin an opportunity to go two-for-one — scoring twice before Minnesota touched the ball again — and tie the game up. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Instead they punted on their next three drives. Wisconsin struggled to move the ball throughout the game, totaling an uninspired 167 yards on the day. Their biggest play was an 18-yard scamper by running back Tawee Walker, but it didn’t come until the start of the fourth quarter. The run gave the Badgers a breath of fresh air and a chance to cut the Gophers’ lead down to seven, but a third-and-7 holding penalty and incomplete pass put the Badgers in full give-up mode. With just over 12 minutes to go, down 14, a bowl on the line and a team that could barely scratch its way into enemy territory, Fickell decided to attempt a field goal rather than trying to keep the season alive. Naturally, kicker Nathaniel Vakos, a 66.7% field goal kicker from 30-39 yards coming into the game, missed from 37-yards out. Perhaps he just wanted in on the air of failure surrounding the team Friday. Just two drives later, Wisconsin’s season ended on a fourth-and-1 run from the shotgun. How fitting. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Photo by Liam Beran | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET Union South’s water broke. It’s a boy! After nine months of grueling pregnancy, Union South’s water broke to reveal the newest edition to the UW-Madison campus. By Henry Moore February 6, 2024 | 3:40am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Union South’s water has broken, and she’s about to give birth to a brand-new building on campus! After nine long months of construction, the city of Madison is about to welcome the baby building to its skyline. Union South has named the building “Theodore,” and he is expected to be built sometime within the next 48 hours. The doctor tasked with delivering this structure is Professor Hardcastle, one of the few members of campus faculty with both an MD and a PhD in architecture. “I’m going to be honest, I had no idea this was even possible,” Hardcastle told The Daily Cardinal. “When my boss said he needed my help with getting a new building on campus, I assumed he was talking about more… conventional means.” Regardless of Hardcastle’s bewilderment at the situation, UW-Madison has been looking forward to the arrival of its new baby brother for months. Last fall, Union South had a “zoning reveal party,” where she revealed the new building would be mixed-use commercial and residential. More recently, an ultrasound showed the blueprint for this building, which will include a UW Credit Union branch, a Badger Market, a Toppers Pizza, an Outback Steakhouse and an 18-hole mini-golf course themed around the 1984 film “Romancing the Stone” starring Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner. There has also been speculation of who the father is, with primary candidates being 333 East Campus Mall and the Discovery Building. As of right now, nothing is confirmed, and both buildings declined to comment. “It doesn’t matter who the father is,” Memorial Union said. “My granddaughter should have done it the right way: get a building permit first!” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Dane County executive signs 2025 budget proposal to increase housing and service opportunities Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn signed the 2025 Dane County budget, focusing on investing in families and the community. By Marin Rosen November 11, 2024 | 1:10pm CST Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn signed the 2025 Dane County budget Nov. 4, that will focus on affordable housing and access to community services alongside the Dane County Board of Supervisors. Kuhn’s budget proposal totals $926 million. The operating budget is $813 million while the capital plan is $112 million, a nearly 7% decrease from 2024. The cut in spending is a result of pandemic-era federal aid expiring. The proposed tax rate is $2.57 per $1,000 of equalized value, down from $2.73 in 2024 and the lowest it has been since 2010. “This budget prioritizes community needs by identifying and funding gaps in services while ensuring we are good stewards of taxpayer dollars,” Kuhn said in a Nov. 4 release. County Board Chair Patrick Miles said the 2025 budget is a “reflection of the values and priorities we all have to serve the Dane County community.” Highlights of Kuhn’s 2025 budget proposal include: Over $30 million for housing and housing supports. Enhance access for veterans to programs they are eligible for. Additional capacity for services in Adult Protective Services for those in need. Funds to establish a Dementia Care Stabilization Unit. Increase language access in multiple departments to county services. Increase support for reentry and jail diversion programs. $10 million commitment to the Dane County Conservation Fund. Investments to the Alliant Energy Center campus and funding for next steps of the Exposition Hall expansion. $16.6 million in county highway projects across the County. $2 million in capital financing to expand access to Sunshine Place, a community resource hub serving eastern Dane County. Newly elected Dane County Executive Melissa Agard will have the power to approve or veto the finalized budget proposal once in office. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal News I used to picket. Now I am taking a vow of silence to honor UW’s free speech policy I am taking an indefinite vow of silence after University of Wisconsin-Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin released a new profound free speech policy. By Peter Pricket October 24, 2024 | 2:00am CDT All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Two months ago, the University of Wisconsin-Madison unveiled its latest Wisconsin Idea-esque innovation for academic free speech: an updated protest policy. Under this policy — reminiscent of John Locke’s political theory — students are restricted from chalking, distributing literature, protesting and most importantly picketing within 25 feet of university facility entrances. Now I used to picket a lot. Big picketer right here. Climate change, sexism, war, you name it, my friends would call me “Peter the Picketer.” But out of a newfound respect for my John Locke, Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin, I am now choosing to take an indefinite vow of silence in honor of her free speech policy. I thought I had been doing the right thing. I thought I was living the Wisconsin Idea. Constantly sifting and winnowing, constantly engaging with the marketplace of ideas. I was exhausted. But alas, our fearless queen Mnookin delivered a speech so enlightening before she dropped her new policy that, coupled together, I knew what had to be done. “Civil disobedience,” she said during her speech, “is a time-honored tradition, but it must be done in a way that respects the laws we’ve thoughtfully put in place to make sure no one ever actually gets around to disobeying them.” She continued, “Protest is fine, as long as it’s orderly, and doesn’t inconvenience anyone, or actually protest anything. In fact, if your civil disobedience is actually civil, I promise war will end.” It really makes you wonder: how much does Mnookin admire Martin Luther King, Jr. (like she says she does), who famously promoted that if students at a university obey all codes and restrictions, change will happen. Of course, we all know Mnookin enjoys a casual soiree with UWPD, but I really think she’s onto something here. Her new free speech advocacy really shook me to core, sending chills down my spine. I’ve decided to embrace my new “chilled” state of existence by taking this vow of silence to avoid breaking the Wisconsin Idea and dishonoring Mnookin’s presence. It’s gone, okay. My friends don’t understand, though. I bring my measuring tape everywhere I go to make sure they honor my queen’s rules and stay 25 feet away from buildings. “Stay back!” I shout at surrounding students. They should be thankful. Truly, at the root, I just can’t be around them anymore, always causing chaos and disrupting my quiet contemplation of bureaucracy. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One time, my classmate Libby Demi picketed outside Library Mall to protest sexism, and a UWPD officer picked Libby up by the shoulders like a stray cat and dragged her to Shannon Hall. Libby, an old soul, cared deeply about tampons. “Goodbye, Libby,” I thought. Gone too soon. If she followed my vow of silence she could’ve avoided this, but she didn’t bring a measuring tape, so I don’t feel remorse. I have loved my vow of silence. I highly consider you to take this vow with me so we can overcome Libby’s sexism and all the other grave tragedies on this planet. Pour one out for Libster. On Wisconsin, my ally! Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Photo by Alex Crawford. ARTS Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour The Internet sensation-turned country star will headline the Majestic Theater Dec. 8. By Bryna Goeking December 3, 2024 | 1:45pm CST It’s been six years since the “Walmart Yodel Kid” stole the internet’s hearts, and now Mason Ramsey has grown up, redefining the limits of oldies and country music in his debut album, “I’ll See You In My Dreams” and his “Falls Into Place” tour. And he has done the impossible — staying relevant beyond his 15 minutes of online fame. This year alone, he released his debut album, a Christmas EP, began his first headline tour and was featured on the soundtrack of “Twisters.” Despite critical acclaim across his projects, it’s a love of music, not fame, that drives his success. His music blends his lifetime love of 1950s and 1960s country music with an Americana essence. After taking a few years off, his sound has grown up with him, carrying a soulful nostalgia beyond his age in songs like “Blue Over You” and “Cowboys Always Come Home.” Days before his stop in Madison at the Majestic Theater on Dec. 8, Mason Ramsey spoke with The Daily Cardinal to reflect on his origins, inspirations and what lies ahead. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. Can you take us back to the Walmart video that went viral? How did it feel to become an internet sensation almost overnight at such a young age? It was definitely something I didn’t expect. I didn't know I was going viral when everything was going on because I wasn't raised on the Internet, so I wasn't able to figure out what was going on until a week later. My cousin got a hold of my grandparents, and she was telling them my video had taken off, and all these crazy things started happening. Like “The Ellen Show,” the “Today” show, “The Tonight Show,” all the places started calling, and they wanted me on. It was a big moment, a pretty crazy moment for me. Honestly, I didn't realize how big it was, but now that I look back, I think that the reason behind it is because my love for music is everything, and I just love doing music. I really didn't think of it as being any different. It was just more opportunities for me to get out there and to sing. Is it difficult to redefine yourself in the public eye after such a viral moment? Do you embrace the “Walmart yodel boy” identity or reject it? The past is something to remember, but, moving on to the future, I have to make sure people know me, the real me, and know my love for music and the artists that really inspired me to make my first album. I would say it was not easy to do at first. It took a little bit of time to transition from the Walmart thing to what I am now. I think everything is going very smoothly. You started as a young performer. How has growing up in the spotlight shaped you personally and professionally? When I first got started in the industry, I didn't really have a lot of songs I felt like fit me very well. I was just trying to figure out my style, and I thought, well, if it's gonna be hard for me to make the kind of music that I want to make, then I probably have to go with this. And during COVID, that turned out not to be the case. Actually, I am able to make and create the music that I want to make, it just took some time. But I feel like now that I have an idea and kind of have a direction of where I want to go for the future, I think I want to stick with it. I’m just super happy [with] how everything’s turned out, and I’m super thankful for my fans and my audience for supporting me throughout the years. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Who are some of your musical influences? I’m very inspired by artists such as Ricky Nelson, Johnny Cash, Roy Orbison and Elvis Presley. I actually picked up on a new inspiration, there's a guy by the name of Gary Stewart. He’s pretty cool; he’s got some cool music I really like. That's the great thing about music, it just keeps growing. You keep expanding your tastes and things you’re interested in. I’m always finding new music, and that’s why I have the influences and taste like I do. I just keep going. Your album features many collaborations with your producer, Dan Ferndandez. How did you two develop such a unique sound? I actually had a call with him before we started writing together and structuring things. But I just kind of talked about my musical influences, and I told them who they were. And I told him my story of being raised on Hank Williams music all throughout my life. I was looking to do the kind of the 50s, 60s, 70s thing throwback. He helped me find my style. I went in with a couple of songs and or future songs I had written down, he helped put the music and stuff to it and that's how “Blue Over You” and all of the other songs off the album came along. This has been a big year for you: turning 18, releasing your debut album, a Christmas EP and headlining your first tour. What has been the highlight, and what are you looking forward to? Man, I’ve had so many highlights this year. Tour, my first album, having a, having a song on the “Twisters” soundtrack, which is really cool. I’ve had so many of them this year, and I’m just really excited to be back out there doing music and stuff. Next year, we’ve already got things in plan, we’re super excited about some of the new material that we're making already in the studio. So it’s gonna be really fun. You joined Lana Del Rey in June for a performance of “Blue Over You.” What is your favorite Lana Del Rey song? I like her song, “Did you know that there’s a tunnel under Ocean Blvd.” I got chills just being on stage singing with her. I don't know how to explain the feeling, other than I got chills in the best way. It was one of those things where you had to be there to really get the full experience. But it felt amazing just being in that environment at Fenway Park. Everything was perfect. Arts editor Rebekah Irby contributed reporting to this article. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Students vote at Nicholas Recreation Center on November 5, 2024. Photo by Cameron Schneider | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Key Wisconsin counties shifted right this election. Here’s the breakdown Vice President Kamala Harris underperformed in Wisconsin’s key Democratic strongholds but made gains in “WOW” counties in a tough loss against former President Donald Trump. By Anna Kleiber November 12, 2024 | 2:00am CST Despite a nationwide shift right, Wisconsin performed the same as it had in the last two presidential elections: within one percentage point. President-elect Donald Trump saw small gains by widening his edge in smaller counties and held his own in larger counties. Unlike the 2020 presidential election, Democrats were unable to replicate big shifts in the Madison and Milwaukee suburbs that had offset Trump’s rural gains, paving the way for President Joe Biden’s victory in Wisconsin. Wisconsin’s 10 electoral votes gave Trump the 270 he needed to secure the presidency over Vice President Kamala Harris. The Nov. 5 election marked the fifth time in the past seven presidential elections that Wisconsin was decided by less than a percentage point, and the seventh time in the past nine elections that the winning candidate for president received 50% of the vote in the state. Here’s a county-by-county look at how both candidates performed in Wisconsin in the 2024 presidential election. Harris underperformed in Wisconsin’s Democratic strongholds While Harris held a considerable margin over Trump in Dane and Milwaukee counties by 38.5%, she performed marginally worse than Biden in both by 1.1%. In Milwaukee County, Harris received 68.3% compared to Biden’s 69.4%, underperforming by roughly one percentage point, according to an independent data analysis from The Daily Cardinal. NBC News reported Dane County was one of the seven counties that could decide the election. In the Democratic stronghold, Trump received 23.4% to Harris’ 75.1%, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. Harris underperformed in the county by 0.4% compared to Biden’s 75.5% in 2020. On University of Wisconsin-Madison campus wards, Harris underperformed by seven points compared to Biden in 2020, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. The ‘WOW’ counties continue to shift left Milwaukee’s suburban communities, while historically Republican strongholds in statewide elections, have slowly trended toward Democrats in the 2016 and 2020 elections. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties — collectively referred to as Wisconsin’s “WOW” counties — are predominantly white and have voted for Republican candidates by margins upwards of 60% in every presidential election in the 21st century, according to state elections results archives. In the 2024 election, Trump won all three counties by a comfortable margin — 19.7%, 10.5% and 36.3% for Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties, respectively — although Harris performed marginally better than Biden, making headway in these historically red counties, according to an independent data analysis from The Daily Cardinal. Harris received 39.5%, 44.1% and 31.3% of the vote in Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties compared to Biden’s 38.9%, 43.3% and 30.3%. There are many factors that could play a role in the suburban shifts seen in the last three presidential elections, including Trump’s authoritarian impulses and controversial rhetoric on immigrants and the economy, that could contribute to the increased Democratic support in the “WOW” counties. The ‘BOW’ counties stay red despite the region trending less red in statewide elections Brown, Outagamie and Winnebago counties make up Wisconsin’s “BOW” counties, home to a growing population center in the Fox Valley that includes cities like Green Bay and Appleton. In recent statewide elections, the region has trended less red. The new 18th Senate District — made up of Appleton in Outagamie County and Menasha, Neenah and Oshkosh in Winnebago County — and the 53rd Assembly District — made up of Neenah, Menasha and part of Appleton — were top targets in the Democrats’ battle for more seats in the state Legislature. While Democrats were unsuccessful in flipping the 53rd Assembly District seat, Democrats comfortably won the 18th Senate District with Democratic candidate Kristin Alfheim taking 53.3% of the vote to Republican candidate Anthony Phillips’ 46.7%. The district was one of five seats Democrats picked up, causing Senate Republicans to lose their supermajority. Trump performed marginally better in all three counties, earning 53.1%, 54.4% and 51.7% in Brown, Outagamie and Winnebago counties compared to 2020’s 52.8%, 54.1% and 51%. Harris, on the other hand, performed similarly to Biden in the counties, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. While both Trump and Republican gubernatorial candidate Tim Michels performed well in the Outagamie County, the county notably swung in favor of liberal-leaning Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Janet Protasiewicz in the spring 2023 election with 51.5% of the county’s vote going to her over conservative former Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Dan Kelly. Three of four battleground counties swing right Sauk, Door, Vernon and Columbia are Wisconsin’s battleground counties, often swinging from election to election. In 2020, the counties went 50-50 — Sauk and Door for Biden and Vernon and Columbia for Trump. In the 2024 election, Trump took three of the four battleground counties in Wisconsin — Sauk, Vernon and Columbia. Harris led Door County, a bellwether county that had accurately predicted the outcome of the last six presidential elections, by 2.3% with 99% of precincts reporting despite Trump ultimately winning the 2024 presidential election. In addition to not accurately predicting the outcome of the election, Harris outperformed Biden by 1.4% in the county, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball goes 2-3 at UMBC Spring Invite The Wisconsin Badgers softball team fought through their last tournament in Baltimore, going 2-3 for the series. By Abby Shulman March 18, 2024 | 12:29pm CDT After a pair of losses on Friday and a pair of wins on Saturday, the Badgers ended their final tournament with a close loss on Sunday. The Badgers started the UMBC Spring Invite in Baltimore on Friday with back-to-back, low-scoring losses against a duo of dog-themed teams — first against the University at Albany Great Danes, then to the UMBC Retrievers. For the first time this season, Wisconsin was shut out, losing 2-0 against Albany. The Great Danes scored in the third and seventh on RBIs and finished with a total of four hits compared to the Badgers’ three. Aside from a throwing error in the seventh, the Badgers battled on the defensive side, including pitcher Shelby Jacobson’s six strikeouts. The second game was closer, with UMBC stealing the 4-3 win in the sixth inning of the tough away matchup for Wisconsin. Like the last game, the scoring got going in the third, but the Badgers took the lead first this time, 1-0. Outfielder Eden Echevarria hit her first career home run with a line drive into deep center field. Resulting from a series of fielding errors, the Retrievers stole the lead back at 3-1 in the bottom of the fourth against pitcher Tessa Magnanimo, who still struck out seven throughout the game. In the following frame, Badgers infielder Fiona Giradot doubled and brought in two runs to tie the game. The Badgers faced an uphill battle after UMBC scored in the sixth, once again from a fielding error. The game ended at the top of the seventh after the Badgers again failed to score. Turning things around The Badgers started with a win against the Colgate Raiders on Saturday, beating them 5-3 after maintaining the lead the entire game. With ten total hits, the Badgers offense erupted in the first after infielder Ava Kuszak started off the game with a double. She made it home later in the inning to kick off the scoring at 1-0. The Badgers’ lead doubled to 2-0 after Catcher Emmy Wells, who went three-for-three at the plate, sent the pitch over the fence. In the top of the third, Wisconsin’s flawless defense ended with an error that allowed a Raiders’ baserunner to get home. The Badgers continued to dominate with the 2-1 score after starting pitcher Shelby Jacobson, who struck out seven this game, kept any more Raiders from scoring. In the fourth, the Badgers capitalized off Colgate’s errors after a hit from Echevarria brought in two runners, increasing the Badgers’ lead to 4-1. Wisconsin's last run of the game came from outfielder Peyton Bannon, who was brought in by Giradot. The Raiders loaded the bases in the seventh and scored two off of Jacobson but ended up falling to the Badgers 5-3. Afterward, Wisconsin came back to beat Albany in a low scoring 1-0 shutout, once again lacking offensive dominance on both teams’ parts similar to Friday’s game. The Badgers broke the tie in the fifth when Wells walked and pinch runner Danielle Lucey came in, reaching home on a throwing error from the Great Danes. Despite not scoring for the rest of the game, Magnanimo kept Albany off the bases on the defensive end, once again tying her count of seven strikeouts. Wisconsin won the shutout without a single hit from a Badger. Ending on a low Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin fought against the Retrievers in the second meeting of the weekend but fell short by two runs, losing 7-5 on Sunday’s game. A single off of Jacobson in the first led to an early pitching change, seeing Magnanimo enter the game — she also allowed a run in the same frame. The Badgers quickly retaliated by tying the game 2-2 in the second after Kuszak’s double brought Echevarria and catcher Emily Bojan home. Outfielder Brooke Kuffel’s single homerun in the top of the third stole the lead back 3-2 over the Retrievers. However, the rally went downhill when UMBC put up five in the bottom of the third. Between a wild pitch and a throwing error from Wisconsin, along with two home runs and five hits from UMBC, the inning ended 7-3. The Badgers persevered until the end. During the fifth, a score from Lucey and an RBI from Bojan — who went two-for-two on the day — brought the score to 7-5. Wisconsin kept fighting but could not score any more. With this being their last tournament of the season, the Badgers will face the University of Iowa on March 22-24 at Iowa’s Bob Pearl Field for a three-game away series to kick off the Big Ten season. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget
A Metro bus is 6x1 1/2 Metric MGRs long Photo by Omar Waheed | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET Madison to use new measurement system named after Alder MGR Govindarajan By Omar Waheed February 22, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Madison will adopt a new system of measurement method inspired by a campus-area alder. New considerations on how to measure the size of developments in a way that’s more relatable to the average Madisonian have been introduced this week. The new measurement, named after District 8 Alder MGR Govindarajan, is based on his height and dubbed an “M-MGR,” or metric MGR. “I’m not sure if I’d want to be the unit of measurement here,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal. One M-MGR equates to 65 inches, 1.81 yards, 0.001 miles or 0.00089 nautical miles for the U.S. imperial measurement system. For metrics, one M-MGR is 165.1 centimeters, 1.651 meters or 0.001651 kilometers. A height ordinance passed in 1966 restricts buildings within one mile of the state Capitol to be no taller than the Capitol’s pillars. At 187 feet, this equates to 34.52 M-MGRs. To scale for planned developments, like the North-South Bus Rapid Transit, the new route is roughly 3,400 M-MGRs. Looking at housing developments, Core Spaces' planned 15-story “Johnson and Broom” student housing development clocks in at approximately 162.4 feet, which is 29.98 M-MGRs. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Magnanimo powers Badgers to another weekend series win The Badgers hosted the Fighting Illini for three games over Saturday and Sunday, winning the first and last. By Justin Alpert April 3, 2023 | 4:22pm CDT Wisconsin Badgers softball (17-10, 4-2) celebrated their 2023 home opener by winning two out of three versus Illinois (22-14, 1-5) at the Goodman Diamond this weekend. Coach Yvette Healy continued to surprise with her pitching usage, leaning almost exclusively on Tessa Magnanimo in the three-game set. The senior’s performance tailed off as the weekend progressed, but she and the Badger offense did enough to secure another pair of Big Ten wins. Friday | 6-2 W Magnanimo yielded two runs on three hits before recording an out in the first inning. Wisconsin’s Kayla Konwent responded with her seventh home run of the season, a remarkable two-run blast on an eye-level fastball. Ellie Hubbard’s first career home run gave the Badgers a 3-2 lead in the fourth. Wisconsin added another three runs in the fifth on Brooke Kuffel’s two-run single and an RBI double to left-center by Hubbard. The sophomore shortstop has not only emerged as a capable hitter — she’s now slugging to all parts of the field and providing a massive boost to the bottom half of the lineup. Magnanimo (W, 2-1) hardly broke a sweat after the first inning. She proceeded to throw six more innings with two hits, no walks and nine strikeouts for a 105-pitch complete game. Illinois had four plate appearances with a runner in scoring position from the second inning on, and each ended in a strikeout. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Sunday | 6-4 L Wisconsin reversed the trend of early deficits by taking a 3-0 lead in the first three innings. Catcher Christaana Angelopulos ran the squeeze play to perfection in the second, dropping down a well-placed bunt to drive in Peyton Bannon. Molly Schlosser followed with a sacrifice fly before Hubbard added an RBI single in the third. Magnanimo returned to the circle and picked up right where she left off, striking out five Fighting Illini through three perfect frames. Things unraveled in the fourth, however, as Illinois tallied two runs on a pair of singles, a double and a triple. Kailee Powell’s leadoff home run in the fifth ended Magnanimo’s outing at 62 pitches. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Maddie Schwartz (L, 5-7) entered and got through the fifth before allowing three unearned runs in the sixth, with Rylie Crane’s one-out error allowing Illinois to take a three-run lead. As they have all season, a Wisconsin error opened the door for a game-changing inning. Gabi Salo got the last four outs of the game for Wisconsin. Angelopulos brought the Badgers within two on her first home run of the season, but it wasn’t enough. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Sunday | 10-9 W The 20-plus mph winds blowing toward the outfield made Sunday afternoon miserable for pitchers on both sides. Magnanimo, who interestingly got the nod for a third straight game, allowed a solo shot in the first inning. Wisconsin then chased Illinois starter Lauren Wiles before she even recorded an out. Hubbard, elevated to the two-hole, hit a two-run home run after Katie Keller drew a leadoff walk. Kuffel then homered to make it 4-1. Another Kuffel home run made it 9-1 Badgers in the second inning, but Illinois began chipping away at the massive deficit. Through five frames it was suddenly 10-9 Wisconsin, and Magnanimo inexplicably remained in the game. She got through the sixth and seventh unscathed, though, capping off her second complete game of the weekend. Magnanimo (W, 3-1) allowed 13 hits and eight earned runs on 136 pitches. Schwartz and Salo had thrown 29 and 18 pitches, respectively, while Paytn Monticelli hadn’t appeared in a game all weekend. It’s unclear why Healy stuck with Magnanimo through her struggles and apparent fatigue, but it worked out in the end for Wisconsin. Between the two teams, the weekend finale featured 20 hits, 19 runs, six doubles, six hit-by-pitches, five home runs and a triple. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Promising power Six home runs in a three-game span is a refreshing sight for the Badgers. Konwent only hitting one of those, while Kuffel and Hubbard continued their breakout campaigns, is a testament to Wisconsin’s greatly improved offense in 2023. Kuffel now boasts a 1.057 OPS with four home runs and 14 RBI, and her .340 average ranks first among qualifying Badgers. Hubbard, meanwhile, is now hitting .294 with 11 RBI and a .400 on-base percentage. For context, the shortstop was hitting .195 after an 0-for-3 performance versus Texas on March 10, so her rise in both production and lineup placement has been rapid. Everyone who has earned a look near the top of the order — Hubbard, Kuffel and Skylar Sirdashney — has excelled. This is an excellent problem to have for Healy, who figures to continue shuffling the lineup as 2023 progresses. While Magnanimo’s usage — 303 pitches and 18 innings from Friday to Sunday — was puzzling, it should leave Wisconsin’s other three arms exceptionally well-rested heading into another week of games. The Badgers are scheduled to host St. Thomas in a Tuesday double-header, but forecasted rain and thunderstorms could lead to cancellation. Wisconsin then heads to Purdue for three weekend games against the struggling Boilermakers (17-19, 2-6). Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Courtesy of Google Maps | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison approves police oversight, older adult services amendments during budget meeting The Council voted to include amendments related to police oversight and other services for Madison residents. By Joseph Panzer November 13, 2024 | 5:31pm CST The Madison Common Council approved Amendments Five and Four of the 2025 operating budget relating to police oversight and older adult services respectively and an additional traffic engineering amendment Tuesday during the first of multiple budget deliberation meetings. The 2025 Executive Operating Budget, introduced by Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway in October and adopted unanimously by the Common Council Tuesday, is partially funded by a $22 million property tax referendum approved by Madison residents on Nov. 5. The final budget must be approved by the council by Nov 14. The council passed 15-5 an amendment restoring $127,210 in funding to the Office of the Independent Monitor (OIM) for employee salaries and legal services. Accountability for firing members of the Madison Police Department who engage in misconduct is through a state appointed board, which led the city to create theOIM in 2020 to give more power to local citizens. Despite having been around for years, the OIM only started accepting complaints last month. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal he is “okay” with continued funding to the OIM despite “valid concerns” about its effectiveness. “That being said, I believe the council should take measures to ensure that the OIM is held accountable to specific goals set by the council,” Govindarajan said. The Common Council also approved by a narrow 11-9 vote a reallocation of $103,870 from the Community Development Division to purchased services for the Older Adult Services Request for Proposal (RFP). The Older Adult Services RFP handles case management and outreach and referral programs for seniors in the Madison area. During the meeting, District 17 Ald. Sabrina V. Madison had concerns on the amendment’s impact on seniors from marginalized communities. Most of the services seniors receive in Madison are through nonprofits that have to apply for funding from money that the city sets aside for them, which this amendment seeks to change due to perceived bias, Govindarajan said. “The city is now debating on deprioritizing what we want to fund,” Govindarajan said. “We’ve historically funded lots of senior services that have benefited older seniors who tend to be more established and resourced, but we haven’t funded nonprofits that help BIPOC/queer seniors.” Black residents in Madison’s South Side have previously told the Cap Times they have not received senior support services from nonprofits like NewBridge in the past as organizations tighten who gets access to resources and programs around the city. Alders also unanimously adopted a $6.3 million amendment to the capital budget for Traffic Engineering during the meeting. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The amendment would allow for Traffic Engineering to accept federal funds for safety improvements, including real-time communication between first responders and transportation authorities, prioritization of traffic lights for emergency vehicles and allowing the city to increase data collection on traffic incidents to reevaluate how it responds to high-risk situations, Govindarajan told the Cardinal. “[This amendment] helps us improve our roads and keep our residents safe,” Govindarajan said. “Allowing emergency vehicles to get through faster on our main roads (including Park Street) will be a major improvement.” Common Council budget deliberations are scheduled to continue through Nov. 14. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Drew Wesson | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH After 40 years, Bus Rapid Transit has redefined Madison BRT’s long-awaited debut this fall has helped streamline Madison’s public transportation system, but it’s taken a lot of planning to get to this point. By John Ernst December 5, 2024 | 5:00am CST Chris Phistry has lived his whole life in Wisconsin’s capital. When he began working on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus as a front desk agent at the Fluno Center five years ago, Phistry needed a way to commute into the city from his west side residence. In Madison, the choice is clear: he takes the bus. Five days a week, Phistry takes the bus to downtown, and in September, he began using the brand-new Bus Rapid Transit system. “In the last 40 years, I've been paying attention to the bus system,” Phistry said. “I’ve seen it shift from a much wider coverage of the city to concentrating a lot more on the corridors that see the most service.” BRT as a whole has been a growing movement in American cities, with cities like Madison receiving federal funding though the Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill and Small Starts Grants to implement and build their systems. Wisconsin’s capital city isn’t the first. The federal government has been funding BRT systems since the first lines debuted in Pittsburgh in the early 1980s. As of 2016, there were over 300 miles of BRT service in the U.S., according to the Federal Transit Administration. Route A, the BRT line Phistry takes to and from work, services the east-west corridor of Madison, running just past I-90 on the east side to Junction Road on the west side. On Sept. 22, Madison Metro Transit launched the line, debuting a project over 40 years in the making. In 2012, Metro Transit Capital Projects Manager Mike Cechvala and his colleagues at the Greater Madison Metropolitan Planning Organization drew the first map of the BRT system, running through the same east-west corridor that Phristry and other commuters use every day. The city formally applied for a federal grant to fund the project in 2017 when Cechvala was working for Metro Transit, he told The Daily Cardinal. After a $107 million investment in 2022, Madison received a $110.6 million construction grant for the project from the FTA in 2023. The Biden administration announced plans to allocate an additional $118.1 million in funding to Madison’s proposed second BRT line, running through the city’s north-south corridor, which is expected to open in 2028, Cechvala said. ‘A generational improvement’ Construction for Madison’s initial BRT project began in 2022 and was divided into three contracts: early works, main body and widen sidewalk. Cechvala said much of the construction dedicated to the new stations, bus lanes and infrastructure was part of the main body project. As part of the BRT system, Metro Transit implemented several new features for the ease of travel, streamlining of transit and sustainability efforts. On the roads, passengers can expect to see a few changes, including new stations and bus-designated lanes painted red. There were 31 new stations constructed for the BRT, according to Cechvala. Stations are equipped with benches, heaters and overhead covering. Each contains a farebox where riders can reload their cards with cash, and real time tracking to give minute-by-minute updates on when passengers can expect the buses to arrive. They’re also raised off the ground, allowing for easier accessibility on and off the bus. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I think [the stations] are super nice,” Jack, a graduate student at UW-Madison, said. “I haven't used the heater yet, [but] I'm sure I'll appreciate [it] when it's zero degrees.” Cechvala said the new stations offer good infrastructure and services that are simply easier to use. “If you see a bus stop sign on the side of the street, I think to most people, they look at that and it's just kind of invisible,” Cechvala said. “If you see the BRT stations and see the real time signs, it kind of feels [easier]. It's respectful to people who ride the bus.” Jack has noticed the bus-only lanes have allowed buses to bypass traffic during particularly busy times of the day, such as weekday rush hour. Jack, who lives near the UW-Health University Hospital, has made Route A, which runs down University Avenue westbound, his main mode of transportation. Madison’s BRT also debuted their new fleet of electric buses purchased from New Flyer, Cechvala said. The electric buses will work on Route A and service some of campus buses like Route 80. The buses will be charged on the opposite ends of the line, but also are capable of en route charging, allowing them to run throughout the day, he said. The buses are also a crucial part of cooperation between the city of Madison and UW-Madison, with the latter assisting with the purchase of the buses, according to UW-Madison Transportation Services. A spokesperson for UW-Madison Transportation Services told the Cardinal that although the project predated Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin’s sustainability initiatives, the project will be a crucial part of her goals and help accelerate sustainable progress. Metro Transit will spend the next few months improving the service of Route A before turning their attention to Route B, Cechvala said. For Phistry, Jack and the thousands of others will use the BRT, the next months and years will determine the success of the new line. “This is a generational improvement,” Cechvala said. “We really hope that this investment pays off, and we're really excited about BRT and glad that people are using it.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Father Enan Zelinski leads St. Paul’s congregation through worship in a Sunday evening Mass service on October 20, 2024. Photo by Ella Hanley | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS St. Paul’s pastors encourage voting at mass. They call it a Catholic principle As pastors of St. Paul’s, Fathers Eric Sternberg and Enan Zelinski believe their responsibility in the upcoming election is to be sources of information for Catholic students struggling to make a decision this election season. Here’s why. By Ella Hanley October 25, 2024 | 7:00am CDT In the chapel of St. Paul’s Catholic Student Center, light organ music plays as members shuffle in quietly, kneeling and crossing themselves before sitting down. The lights are dimmed as the procession enters the chapel, and the priest, Father Enan Zelinski, enters in long, green robes. Incense pours out of a gold thurible suspended from gold chains and gently swung by a member of the procession. The smoke wafts up through the church while the choir sings praises and the congregation joins, their voices echoing. Zelinski leads the group in song before beginning his message. As pastors of St. Paul’s, Zelinski and Father Eric Sternberg believe their responsibility in the upcoming election is to be sources of information for Catholic students struggling with making a decision. This particular service, the first of two before the election, was used to educate students on core principles from which to guide their ballot decisions. “We don't preach particular people or particular parties,” Zelinski said during this Sunday’s evening service. “We preach eternal principles, principles of the church that we as members asked to put into practice when we go to vote for our elected officials.” Mary Bosch Father Eric Sternberg speaks with The Daily Cardinal in an interview on October 15, 2024. Sternberg told The Daily Cardinal in an interview he considers himself to be “separate” from the secular world, but that’s not to say he isn’t living in it. He finds “great freedom” in remaining nonpartisan, and yet Sternberg underscored the importance of participating in the upcoming election. “I’d argue there are a number of Catholics saying to themselves, ‘maybe I sit this one out,’” Sternberg said. “We’re here to remind you of the principles of which you are to guide yourself with. And then, remind you that you have a duty to vote.” Sternberg believes it is unrealistic to expect to find a political candidate who fully aligns with Catholic principles, and discernment becomes essential when a candidate agrees with ideology on one issue but differs on another. While Catholics may feel backed into a corner this election season, their duty to vote is one rooted in an understanding of the Catholic “common good,” according to Zelinski. Sternberg told the Cardinal that Catholics understand participating in elections to be one of the ways people can seek the common good in society. He also said that Catholics find “no political home” in current politicians or politics. Sternberg advises evaluating candidates based on a hierarchy of core principles, at the root of which is the right of a human person, which he says is “distinctly different” from individual rights. “If we don't understand, as a society, respect for the person and for their inalienable rights, first among them being the right to life, everything else will fail. The first fundamental element of the common good is the respect of the person,” Zelinksi said during the service. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Catholics find themselves at a crossroads when evaluating candidates. For example, Sternberg noted the debate around border control to be particularly split. The church states clearly that lawfully organized states have the right to control who enters and leaves — meaning the state also has the right to return people who entered undocumented. Still, another Catholic virtue is hospitality to strangers, which can lead to tension between upholding laws and responding compassionately to those seeking refuge. “How can I maintain a just approach to immigrants within my society without maintaining integrity of the border?” Sternberg said. The question has been an ongoing debate for years. He asserts that Catholics have a duty to be “reasonable in the choices they make.” Both sides could provide a reasonable justification for supporting their respective positions, he argued. However, Sternberg said some methods used to maintain border integrity, such as camps and mass deportations, are unacceptable. And while Sternberg encourages civil discourse among members of St. Paul’s, he places significant importance on respectful dialogue and encourages his congregation to engage in “vigorous debates” grounded in reason and civility. “The attitude around St. Paul’s, as close as it is to the election, has actually been very peaceful. I've heard lots of students having conversations about ideas, and some of those conversations get very fired up,” Sternberg said. “But we’ve set the tone — If you want to have a screaming, shouting match, go to the bar.” Indeed, the energy inside the church was quiet and respectful as members prayed “that those who govern will defend true justice.” Members of the congregation sat silently after the sermon in a moment of reflection and prayer before resuming worship through song as the organ’s chords blended with the voices of the choir. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Big Read Books author Rebekah Taussig's gives her keynote address on "Sitting Pretty: The View from My Ordinary Resilient Disabled Body" on October 16, 2024. Photo by Emma Schieffer | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Conversations around disability reigned as Go Big Read author visited campus. Students hope it can stay this way Rebekah Taussig visited the University of Wisconsin-Madison for discussions on disability in classrooms, panels and in her keynote speech as part of the Go Big Read curriculum. By Bryna Goeking October 18, 2024 | 4:25pm CDT Dr. Rebekah Taussig, author of this year’s Go Big Read book “Sitting Pretty: The View from My Ordinary Resilient Disabled Body,” visited the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus for guided discussions about her story and experiences as a disabled person. At the keynote speech Wednesday night, Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin said the book has been integrated into 40 courses, with 9,000 copies distributed across campus. Taussig was emotional seeing the overfilled crowd, many of whom shared they had read her book. “I’m having kind of a surreal moment,” she said. “I’m just pausing over this and seeing your faces, and just want to thank you. It feels really big to me.” Taussig and Mnookin discussed the book and its larger connections to experiences surrounding disability. As a child in rural Kansas, Taussig said her experience in a wheelchair left her feeling like a “class pet” rather than a person. She recounted arriving on the bus for disabled students in elementary school and having her first stark experience with feeling othered. She talked about writing her book, specifically the uncomfortable chapters about her first time teaching about disability — an experience she recalled as like “jumping into an ice cold pool.” But these experiences of learning how to connect disability to others helped her frame how she wrote her book. “So many people are connected to this conversation from so many directions and in a way that I can’t anticipate, but I know how to anticipate you will be connected in some way,” Taussig said. Taussig will publish “We Are the Scrappy Ones” in April 2025, a children’s book celebrating children with disabilities. Disabled community unites on campus Disabled UW-Madison students, faculty and staff joined Taussig for a panel discussion on disability on campus Tuesday night. Students shared issues with housing, receiving accommodations and social issues caused by disability, thanking Taussig for helping to normalize these issues. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One panelist, student Brelynn Bille, mentioned the book chapter about dating as a disabled person. “It felt like I was the person that you wrote it for,” she said. “It’s exactly why we need more books on this and sharing that perspective because it helps to remove that otheringness.” At Wednesday’s address, one audience member, a sophomore in high school who is disabled, thanked Taussig for sharing her “complications of kindness” and said it helped her understand her own self-advocacy. Many times, Taussig echoed the importance of stories in understanding frameworks of oppression and change. “I am rather biased, but I do believe that stories are the way to change people’s thinking the most deeply and directly, in the most lasting ways,” she said. A ‘filtered’ experience One audience member asked Taussig about her experience navigating UW-Madison’s campus in a wheelchair Wednesday night. Taussig said her experience was “filtered,” with Go Big Read officials ensuring that all paths and elevators would be accessible. At Tuesday’s panel, students shared this isn’t always the case. One student, Emmett Lockwood, said they had lived in a building on campus where the elevator company had been out of business for 30 years, causing a delay in repair parts. Mnookin echoed this sentiment, noting that her husband works on the third floor of a building on campus without an elevator. She said that adding an elevator to this building would require a complete transformation, something the state Legislature and donors have not focused on. Panelist Brelynn Bille said UW-Madison “seems content with merely meeting the bare minimum [accessibility] requirements,” in an Instagram post. In the post, she shared that although Mnookin had previously told Bille that “she needs to hear these issues directly to advocate for them,” the chancellor was not present at the disabled students panel, which Bille called a “contradiction” and “disheartening.” At both the keynote address and disability panel, Taussig emphasized that disability advocacy does not end when she leaves, and lasting, oftentimes slow, change is needed to make institutional changes. “I get to come into these communities and these spaces where people have just read the book, and everybody's excited, and we're planning events around it, and then what happened?” Taussig said. “What do we do with the things that we learned?” “So I think part of it is thinking about how we can carry the things that we practice now in the future,” she said. “I think it's learning to do more of that and not just do it this one time.” A self-proclaimed lover of stories, Taussig asked the question: “what are the other books?” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Maile Llanos | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Does the ‘Tortured Poet's Department’ deserve a Grammy? No An Album of the Year win could push Taylor Swift into a creative stagnation. By Marit Erickson November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST The 2025 Grammy Award nominations were released earlier this month with huge “pop-girl" names like Billie Eilish, Beyoncé, Taylor Swift, Charli XCX and Sabrina Carpenter making appearances in the Best Album category. 2024 has been an impressive year for women in music. Almost all of them went on global stadium tours, drawing in millions of fans every night. “Cowboy Carter,” “The Rise and Fall of a Midwest Princess,” “Short n’ Sweet,” “Hit Me Hard and Soft” and “Brat” all did great in the charts. But there is one project nominated that feels different from the rest: Swift’s 11th studio album, “The Tortured Poets Department.” Despite doing better numbers-wise than other nominations, I do not think it should be on the list at all. It is the worst thing Swift has released in her career thus far, and its success is a product of a brainwashed fan base and uninspired song writing. If it wins Album of the Year, it could halt the creativity Swifites love their mother for. It doesn’t bring me joy to denounce a beloved artists’ work — Swift appears in my Spotify Wrapped year after year despite me trying to look indie. But I think it is a more impressive feat as a fan to acknowledge their weak moments, their duds, their skips. “The Tortured Poets Department” is unfortunately that. Many of Swift’s diehard fans weaponize the mode of poetry as an excuse for lackluster melodies. But many of her lyrics throughout the album come across as melodramatic and whiney or infused with cringey millennial-isms. Titles like “My Boy Only Breaks His Favorite Toys,” “Down Bad,” “I Can Fix Him (No Really I Can)” and “Who’s Afraid of Little Old Me” will age like milk. I already can’t look at them without wincing. She also repeats metaphors to the point of cliche. Take “The Black Dog” and the line, “That was intertwined in the fabric of our dreaming” compared to the line “We embroidered the memories of the time I was away” in “loml.” Her poetry doesn’t work in this album because I don’t care about a billionaire’s plights. Why should we sob about her bad breakup when gas is $4 per gallon? Obviously, not everyone experiences heartbreak the same, but song titles like “I Hate It Here” saying she’s “scared to go outside,” and that she wishes she could live in the 1830s “but without all the racists” come across as inaccessible to non-billionaires. In “Who’s Afraid of Little Old Me,” Swift sings, “You don’t get to tell me about ‘sad.’” There are wars happening right now, girl. What are you talking about? And what if I don’t care about lyrics? What if I listen to music for the instruments and singing and not whatever deep message I can glean from its Genius website? Then “The Tortured Poets Department” loses all its impact, it does not compare to her earlier works like “Red,” “1989,” “Fearless” or “Speak Now.” This monotonous sound in the whopping 31 tracks of Swift’s deluxe edition blend together like a haze, connected by the droning synth producer Jack Antonof holds so tightly to his chest. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Consider the cultural phenomena that have emerged from some of the other albums nominated for Album of the Year. “Espresso” by Carpenter, “HOT TO GO!” by Chappell Roan and literally all of “Brat” by Charli XCX will be looked back on as defining the summer of 2024. These releases and their mass success mark a new era in music, with new faces in the pop-girl category. Many of the 2010s familiar faces like Katy Perry or Rihanna have taken a back seat in the charts, giving newcomers the opportunity to take the spotlight. Swift and Beyoncé occupy a similar space, with each existing in both old and new eras of pop. But where Beyoncé has evolved, pushing her creativity and mastering new genres in “Renaissance” and “Cowboy Carter,” Swift is nesting in the grossly familiar synth-pop. Hitting a plateau this late in your career is embarrassing, especially after the release of two masterpieces like “folklore” and “evermore.” This is the core of what bothers me about Swift’s 2025 Album of the Year nomination — she’s won (and lost) for work that was 10 times better. Maybe Swift’s loss in 2014 for “Red” is the reason for “The Tortured Poets Department’s” dullness. The main criticism against “Red” was that it lacked cohesion, and the sway between pop radio hits and country ballads was discouraged by critics. Swift would be better off ignoring the critics. The sonic variety of “Red” has been haunting her, lurking in the back of her mind for the last 10 years. Its result is over 30 tracks of the same stuff. If she wins in February, I'm afraid the positive feedback loop will never allow her to change. After almost 20 years in the music industry, Swift probably isn’t taking any advice from lowly arts desk writers like me. But as a fan, I really hope she goes in a different direction for future albums, and a fifth Album of the Year win might prevent that. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Schwartz’s no-hitter sets tone for dominant weekend in West Lafayette Badger softball traveled to West Lafayette and took care of the Boilermakers with ease. By Justin Alpert April 10, 2023 | 11:00am CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team (20-10, 7-2) outclassed the Purdue Boilermakers (17-22, 2-9) in a three-game sweep this weekend. Wisconsin’s pitching staff, highlighted by Maddie Schwartz’s Friday no-hitter, came one out from a weekend-long shutout. That, combined with 19 total runs from the offense, helped the Badgers overpower Purdue and keep pace in the Big Ten standings. Friday | 7-0 W Schwartz was perfect through five innings while Wisconsin tried to figure out Boilermaker starter Madi Elish, who entered with a pedestrian 3.86 ERA. The Badgers managed just one hit and two baserunners in the first four frames but finally got to Elish (L, 6-2) in the fifth. Rylie Crane reached on an error before Peyton Bannon doubled, then another infield miscue allowed both to score. Molly Schlosser made it 4-0 with a two-run triple and scored on Katie Keller’s sacrifice fly. Kayla Konwent extended the lead with a two-run home run in the seventh inning. With Schwartz in the circle, though, one run would’ve been plenty for Wisconsin, let alone seven. The only blemishes on Schwartz’s statline were a sixth-inning walk and a seventh-inning baserunner, who reached on Crane’s error. Schwartz (W, 6-7) hurled the 11th no-hitter in program history with a remarkably efficient performance, never throwing more than 14 pitches in an inning. She struck out only three, relying instead on the pitch-to-contact approach which has made her a force during her Wisconsin career. After adjusting to a lighter workload and more relief appearances in 2023 while Paytn Monticelli, Gabi Salo and Tessa Magnanimo pitched — and excelled — more regularly, Schwartz proved her effectiveness hasn’t waned. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Saturday | 7-0 W The Badgers carried the momentum into Game 2 of the series with a pair of first-inning runs. Keller’s speed — and value as a leadoff hitter — was on full display as she walked, advanced to third on Konwent’s single and scored on Brooke Kuffel’s sacrifice fly. The pop to right appeared too shallow for Keller to score, but she got a great jump and narrowly avoided the tag at home. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Unlike Friday’s, this 7-0 victory involved some stress for Magnanimo and Wisconsin. Two singles and a walk loaded the bases for Purdue in the first inning, but Magnanimo got a swinging strikeout to escape the jam. The Boilermakers got a runner in scoring position in the second and fifth innings, too, ultimately leaving both stranded. Christaana Angelopulos pulled a pitch to right-center for her second home run in as many weekends. Konwent didn’t record an out all afternoon, going 2-for-2 with two singles, a pair of walks and a run. Magnanimo (W, 4-1) threw her third complete-game victory in her last four outings, dating back to March 31. She tallied six strikeouts in this shutout, yielding six hits and two walks. A 2.87 ERA through 39 innings is a testament to Magnanimo’s success in 2023, and that the mark is fourth among Badger pitchers confirms how deep and dominant Wisconsin’s staff is. It’s often a mystery who will start each game, but it hasn’t mattered much. Sunday | 5-1 W Schwartz (W, 7-7) was nearly as good in the series finale as she was Friday. She allowed three hits in 6.1 shutout frames but did struggle with control at times, throwing only 36 of 61 pitches for strikes and hitting three batters. Her afternoon actually included two appearances. Salo entered with a 5-0 lead to begin the seventh, and she allowed a run on three hits while recording two outs. Schwartz then returned to the circle and induced a groundout to end the game — the right-hander has been a starter and reliever during her illustrious career, but doing both in one game was a new experience. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Wisconsin’s offense, meanwhile, applied pressure throughout the Sunday afternoon victory. Kuffel got the scoring started with a first-inning RBI single. The Badgers scored twice in the second on singles by Konwent and Keller, then again in the third and fourth innings. Once again, the lineup provided ample run support for Wisconsin’s stingy pitching staff. A conference contender The 13.1 innings of scoreless work lowered Schwartz’s ERA to an even 2.00 and her WHIP to 1.00. Schwartz has thrown 19 consecutive innings versus conference opponents without allowing an earned run and now boasts a 1.12 ERA in 25 innings of Big Ten play. Magnanimo leads the staff with 26.2 Big Ten innings. Salo and Monticelli, interestingly, have only pitched seven and 3.1 innings, respectively, since the conference schedule began. The latter’s most recent appearance came March 24 at Michigan State — it’s unclear whether there’s a clear reason for Monticelli’s absence, or if she’s just taking a backseat role to Wisconsin’s more experienced arms. Wisconsin’s excellent pitching within the conference has been encouraging, although it’s worth noting the opponents thus far — Michigan State, Illinois and Purdue — are three of the worst Big Ten teams. Schwartz and co. figure to regress between now and the Big Ten Tournament as the competition heightens. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Konwent’s bat has been as dependable as any during her five-year career, and 2023 is no exception. A six-hit weekend at Purdue boosted her slash line to .373/.523/.723, and she’s on pace for 12 regular-season home runs after hitting 10 last year. Skylar Sirdashney has slumped badly after her early-season breakout. The third baseman has dropped in the lineup during a 1-for-25 stretch dating back to March 24. Sirdashney’s average has dropped from .328 to .247 in the eight-game span, but she’ll likely remain in the lineup for the foreseeable future. A 7-2 conference record places Wisconsin behind only Northwestern (9-1) and Indiana (9-2) in the Big Ten. With Northwestern coming to town for three games this weekend, the Badgers can confirm their status as one of the conference’s top teams. The Wildcats have been excellent in 2023, but Wisconsin’s consistent mix of dominant pitching and offensive production should make for a highly competitive series. First, however, the Badgers host DePaul on Tuesday and St. Thomas for a Wednesday double-header. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Aspen trees eaten leafless by spongy moth caterpillars on June 18, 2021. Photo courtesy of Mark Zierden/UW-Madison. SCIENCE Invasive spongy moths strip aspen tree foliage, damage a native species, UW-Madison researcher says Rick Lindroth at the University of Wisconsin-Madison found that spongy moth caterpillars strip aspen tree foliage, increasing tree defenses and causing harm to a native species. By Lindsay Pfeiffer September 12, 2024 | 5:00am CDT Invasive spongy moths are defoliating aspen trees and making their leaves regrow with high levels of toxins, harming a native insect, according to recent research from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. In 2021, Rick Lindroth, UW-Madison entomology professor emeritus, began noticing this effect. After his research group originally planted aspen trees in 2010 to conduct other experiments on the trees at the Arlington Agricultural Research Station, a spongy moth outbreak occurred following their absence during COVID-19 in 2020. The research team — made up of Lindroth, visiting scientist Patricia Fernandez, former graduate student Clay Morrow and post-doctorate Mark Zierden — had to take a different route according to Lindroth. “When we walked into the aspen stand in spring 2021, we realized there were thousands of egg masses — each egg mass contains 400 to 600 larva — and we were not anticipating that. I knew right then that we were doomed to have a major defoliating outbreak of spongy moths,” Lindroth told The Daily Cardinal. Spongy moths, which arrived in North America from Europe in 1869, only entered Wisconsin in the early 2000s, according to Lindroth. They feed on more than 300 species of trees and can defoliate trees for miles, which can harm entire forests, he said. When the outbreak occurred on aspen trees at the Arlington Agricultural Research Station, the researchers instead decided to study the consequences of spongy moth defoliation on the native polyphemus silk moth, the second-largest moth in North America. “What we were looking at is the legacy effect of the defoliation that carried on in terms of food quality for the native polyphemus moth,” Lindroth said. Although these two species don’t directly interact, both moths feed on aspen trees at different times of the year. “Spongy moths feed early in the season and then they’re done. Polyphemus moths feed mid- to late summer so anything the spongy moths do to alter food quality will impact the polyphemus moth,” Lindroth said.. Aspen trees produce salicylate-like compounds, which can be highly toxic at high levels, according to Lindroth. The compounds are similar to aspirin as they are made up of a salicin derivative and are known as salicinoids, he noted. “A spongy moth caterpillar feeding on a tree with normal levels of these salicinoids would consume, in human terms, 5-7 pounds of aspirin in a day. Imagine what that would do to your gut,” Lindroth said. When the spongy moth eats aspen leaves in the spring, the aspen trees respond by reflushing a new set of leaves. But these leaves have eight times the levels of salicinoid defenses that they previously had, according to Lindroth. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email And although spongy moths and polyphemus moths have both adapted to eat these toxins at normal levels, when aspen trees increase their defenses following the spongy moth’s feeding season, it overwhelms polyphemus caterpillars’ ability to detoxify them, Lindroth said. This can result in lesions in the gut, septicemia, hemorrhaging and death, he said. Spongy moth outbreaks don’t only negatively affect the polyphemus moth. They also degrade aspen trees. Aspen trees that have lost their leaves even once have a dramatic reduction in growth for the year, according to Lindroth. At the Arlington plot, he said their aspen trees were more susceptible to disease and drought years later, causing some to die. Additionally, Lindroth told the Cardinal aspens are the most widely distributed tree species in North America and therefore aid a great deal in carbon sequestration, the process of capturing carbon dioxide from the air, which helps combat climate change. Other research done by Lindroth has shown that when trees photosynthesize, they can use the energy produced to either grow or make defense compounds. Growth creates carbon sequestration, he said. “I think we can make the argument that invasive species like spongy moths can negatively affect the capacity of aspen forest to sequester carbon by removing leaves so the trees aren’t photosynthesizing, and when the leaves reflush, they’re busy making defense compounds rather than growing,” Lindroth said. Lindroth underscored that there is currently no experimental evidence for this, but it has potential to be a serious implication for the spongy moth outbreaks. To combat this, the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection is part of a federal “Slow the Spread” program that aims to prevent spongy moths from traveling westward and to aid in treatment of isolated outbreaks. Treatments include aerially spraying a bacterial insecticide or spraying wax droplets containing pheromone to stop male spongy moths from finding females. Although some insecticide sprays may be able to treat larger outbreaks, Lindroth said that once they’ve been established in an area, there’s not much that can be done to contain the outbreak completely. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Rachel Barnes | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE The major dilemma: It's okay to change your mind By Hallie Albert July 25, 2024 | 2:00am CDT To choose a major at 18 can feel like deciding on your life's direction before you've even had the chance to figure out your interests. The pressure is an intense combination of family expectations, societal norms and your own hopes for the future. It’s a decision that can lead to a lot of stress and anxiety, especially when you’re not sure if you’re making the right choice. I know this because I’ve been there. I started college as a pre-med major. I had set my mind at a young age to become a doctor, as I’ve always loved learning about the human body. The idea of helping people and making a positive impact on many lives was truly inspiring to me. I cemented this specific path. In fact, I didn't think to put any thought toward trying anything else. But as I dove into my freshman year coursework, to my surprise, I felt uneasy. The subject matter didn’t interest me how I expected it to, the workload felt to be too much and the thought of spending the next decade in this field filled me with anxiety. I did not want to admit this to myself, so I kept going despite the stress. I felt trapped, it felt like I was sabotaging myself. I knew I was not happy with the work I was doing, but I continued to convince myself I was. Still, to change my major meant I was failing, like I quit on my dream within the first year. I remember asking myself, “If I don’t do this, what am I going to do?” I couldn’t think of anything — until I changed my mindset. I eventually realized holding on to what wasn’t right for me was the real failure. Letting go of my 18-year-old-self's expectations was the biggest step I made in achieving satisfaction. Although switching my major to Communication Arts felt like jumping off a cliff, it turned out to be the best decision I could have made. I realized I am able to use my love of working with people in many other ways than just medicine, as I can make an impact on many lives despite my major choice. My switch prompted me to continue on my path of growth and development but I decided to add on certificates in both entrepreneurship and economics. Through the process of finding my interests and passions, I not only found one specific major I loved, but multiple subjects I enjoyed. I would have had no idea that I had a passion for all of these areas if I continued on a path I disliked. This was a lesson I learned proving great discovery and growth can come from the discomfort of the unknown. College is a time for you to learn and grow. A time for finding yourself, your passions, hobbies and interests. So do it, allow yourself to be free and try new things. Allow yourself to escape the idea of a set “plan” and start writing your “plan” as it comes. It’s okay — and sometimes necessary — to change your major because growth and change are natural. At 18, you’re still figuring out who you are. It’s completely normal for your interests and passions to shift as you gain more life experience. Don’t be afraid to let your major reflect that growth. Sometimes, it takes exploring different fields to find what truly excites you. Don’t see a major change as a setback but a step closer to discovering what you’re passionate about. In addition, sticking with a major you strongly dislike can lead to intense burnout. College is hard enough without the added stress of pursuing a path that doesn’t work for you. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If you’re feeling the pressure of choosing the “right” major or contemplating a switch, know you are not alone. Remember it’s okay to change your mind. Your college journey is about discovering what makes you happy and fulfilled. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison reinstates, alters sex education module after link to adult film award site prompted removal The university removed the SexWise module after an October inquiry from conservative student newspaper The Madison Federalist revealed the module contained a link to an adult film award site. By Jake Piper December 3, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison reinstated a sex education module after removing the module on Oct. 16, 2024 because an inquiry from conservative student newspaper, The Madison Federalist revealed the module contained a link to an adult film award site, the Feminist Porn Awards. University Health Services offers the SexWise Canvas module as one of four violence prevention modules. UW-Madison first-years and transfers are required to complete one of the four modules before enrolling in classes and all other students are encouraged to take one GetWise module each year. UW-Madison spokesperson Kelly Tyrrell told The Daily Cardinal the university conducted their yearly review of the module ahead of schedule after Federalist Editor-in-Chief Benjamin Rothove’s inquiry and reinstated the module with “updates throughout the program in support of clarity, plain language and inclusivity.” “Research shows that comprehensive sex education can prevent people from both causing and experiencing sexual violence. SexWIse aims to provide information that meets students where they are — regardless of their sexuality, gender identity or level of knowledge,” Tyrrell said. Spencer Runde, Promoting Awareness, Victim Empowerment UW member, told the Cardinal most changes to the module were “minor” and questioned the initial removal of the module. “Even though just a small part of my experience was in that module, I still felt like I got silenced by the university,” Runde said. Rory Madden, Sex Out Loud chair, also worried about the module’s absence during the Red Zone, a period of time from September to Thanksgiving during which the majority of sexual assaults on college campuses occur. “I want to go to a school knowing the administration supports me and all my identities and overall taking [GetWise] down was really hurtful to me as a queer person and as a survivor,” Madden said. Runde and Madden were both “frustrated” by the Federalist article. “I think that his article hurt a lot of people,” Madden said. Madden supported some changes to the module, but overall she said “the cons outweigh the pros in this situation.” The changes she disagreed with included removing words from the module’s “sex glossary,” resources surrounding safe intimacy and sex, the university's land acknowledgement from all GetWIse modules, links to a “feminist, ethical porn blog” and rewording mentions of casual sex. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Madden disagreed with Rothove’s characterization of the link as a “pornographic website.” Instead, she argued the link was to “a blog that contained a link to an ethical porn site, which talked about where to find ethical porn.” When asked about their thoughts on the removal of the website, Runde declined to comment. Tyrrell said the university updated references in the module with “research-based evidence and to best align with the program’s goals.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Miles Morales (Shameik Moore) and Gwen Stacy (Hailee Steinfeld) take on The Spot (Jason Schwartzman) in Columbia Pictures and Sony Pictures Animation's SPIDER-MAN™: ACROSS THE SPIDER-VERSE. ARTS ‘Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse’ is a web-slinging, dimension-hopping masterpiece By Kennan Chojnacki June 28, 2023 | 2:00am CDT "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse" lives up to the high bar set by "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse" released in 2018. The movie is a dazzling spectacle with fantastic voice acting, animation and writing which culminates in one of the best multiverse stories played out on screen in modern cinema. Written by Chris Miller, Phil Lord and David Callaham and directed by Joaquim Dos Santos, Justin K. Tompson and Kemp Powers, "Across the Spider-Verse" is set one year after the events of "Into the Spider-verse" when Miles Morales (Shameik Moore) is struggling to balance family obligations, school and the responsibilities of being Spider-Man. After trying to stop an initially weak villain, Spot (Jason Schwartzman), Miles misses important family events, straining his relationship with his family. Miles begins to question his purpose as Spider-Man and the dilemma of being with his family or saving others. At the same time, Spot becomes a more formidable villain who threatens all of the multiverse, leading the Spider-Society to send Ghost-Spider Gwen Stacy (Hailee Steinfeld) to Miles' world to deal with the situation. Gwen’s arrival leads to Miles getting involved in another multiversal adventure that results in him being introduced to the head of the Spider-Society, Miguel O'Hara (Oscar Isaac). But after things go south, Miles must outrun Miguel and the rest of the Spider-Society before they can prevent Miles from stopping a tragedy. One of the best features of this movie is the unique animation style first seen in “Into the Spider-verse.” For the past two decades, animation has shied away from stylistic and “risky” animation in exchange for photorealism. However, the Spider-Verse series has innovated arguably the most high-profile alternative to photorealism. The movies blend 3D and 2D animation styles with a hint of comic book aesthetic to create a unique, never-before-seen animation style. The movie is truly a spectacle to watch. A huge amount of credit should be given to the Sony Animation team that worked on this movie. Not only did they reutilize a distinctive animation style for Miles' world, but each of the four other universes he visits also has a unique look. The aesthetics of each of the universes were built with the help of the original comic book artists who first envisioned them. Each universe has a different color scheme, character design and animation style which keeps the movie feeling fresh and new. The best example is Gwen’s homeworld of Earth-65, which predominantly uses a cool-color palette with a comic book aesthetic. When more emotional scenes play out, the detail of the background is lost to blobs of colors that work to enhance the character’s feelings and show clashing ideologies. The world truly demonstrates how the animation is not just for a fresh aesthetic but is also used to enhance the story’s mood. Another critical item to note about the film is that the movie does not rely on easter eggs and nostalgia to carry the plot. Whereas many modern Hollywood films and Television shows have become over-reliant on nostalgia and familiar tropes to carry a weak plot, “Across the Spider-Verse” has a plot that can stand on its own with great character growth and themes elevated through easter eggs and nostalgic moments. The voice actors and actresses in this film all deliver their lines in a way that adds something to their characters. Moore elevates Miles' internal conflict regarding what it means to be a hero through his dynamic voice range. Similarly, Steinfeld continues to deliver fantastic voice acting for Ghost-Spider that compliments the more dramatic moments her character faces in the film. A standout in this film is Daniel Kaluuya as Spider-Punk, who is portrayed as a wild card throughout the film. Kaluuya plays his character with a fun wittyness that adds natural humor to the film while still keeping the viewer intrigued as to what his character may do. Oscar Isaac and Jason Schwartzman both do stellar jobs playing the villains in the film. Isaac delivers his lines with a power that establishes his dominance on screen while also pointing out the authoritarian nature of the Spider-Society. Schwartzman has an interesting way of delivering his lines, with his voice slowly becoming more confident throughout the movie showing how his character is a growing threat. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse” clocks in at 2 hours and 19 minutes, but the movie does not feel that long. It has excellent pacing that allows for the dramatic scenes to be fleshed out, and the dramatic moments impact the plot and audience while still allowing for enough action scenes to keep the audience engaged. With a proven track record of two excellent movies, I can't wait to see what the next movie in the Spider-Verse franchise will add to the universe. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Derrick Van Orden speaks at the Wisconsin World Championship Cheese Contest on March 5, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Wisconsin Republicans sweep battleground U.S. House districts Republicans took the contested 1st, 3rd and 8th Congressional Districts, keeping their 6-2 advantage in the U.S. House of Representatives. By Alaina Walsh and Audrey Lopez-Stane November 6, 2024 | 11:36am CST Republicans seized all three Wisconsin battleground districts in the U.S. House of Representatives. Incumbent U.S. Reps. Bryan Steil and Derrick Van Orden held onto the 1st and 3rd districts, respectively, and Tony Wied won the 8th district, giving the GOP six of the state’s eight districts. Steil defeated Democrat Peter Barca by 10.3%. Steil has represented the southeast region since January 2019, when he defeated Democrat Randy Bryce. Van Orden was reelected in the 3rd district, keeping a once blue seat flipped red in 2022. Van Orden defeated Democratic challenger Rebecca Cooke by 2.8%. Wied won the 8th district by 14.6% over opponent Kristin Lyerly. Wied filled the vacancy after Republican U.S. Rep. Mike Gallagher resigned back in April. “I will not let you down! I’m overwhelmed by the support,” 8th Congressional District U.S. Rep. Tony Wied said in a tweet Tuesday night. Final counts from the state are: 1st Congressional District (R) Bryan Steil 206,218 votes 54.1% Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email (D) Peter Barca 166,787 votes 43.8% 3rd Congressional District (R) Derrick Van Orden 211,696 votes 51.4% (D) Rebecca Cooke 200,556 votes 48.6 % 8th Congressional District (R) Tony Wied 240,519 votes 57.3% (D) Kristin Lyerly 178,903 votes 42.7% Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Colin Farrell in Max's "The Penguin." Photo courtesy of Macall Polay/HBO. ARTS The Penguin is horrible. That’s what makes ‘The Penguin’ amazing Lauren LeFranc’s spinoff of Matt Reeves’ 2022 film “The Batman” is one of the best shows of 2024. By Oliver Gerharz November 23, 2024 | 2:00am CST This review contains major spoilers for “The Batman” (2022) and minor spoilers for the earlier episodes of “The Penguin” (2024). For the last 40 years, the top hat-and-monocle-wearing Penguin has been swinging around his weaponized umbrella in bird-themed duels with Batman. Max’s 2024 miniseries “The Penguin” ditches these parts of the character to show a more revoltingly evil version than usual. The show, a TV spinoff/follow–up to Matt Reeves’ 2022 oscar-nominated superhero movie “The Batman,” recently finished its eight episode run. “The Penguin” quickly reintroduces its title character, a mobster named Oz Cobb (Colin Farrell) who waddles like a penguin because of an untreated foot deformity. The ableist nickname constantly upsets Oz’s pride, one of the main drives and a frequent breaking point for his character. “The Penguin” is yet another show starring an egomaniac in organized crime. But its shoulder-rubbing with the superhero genre gives it an excuse to be stranger and more eccentric than shows like “The Sopranos” or “Breaking Bad.” But that doesn’t mean that the Penguin is any less insidious as his crime drama contemporaries. In “The Penguin,” Oz feels far removed from his 1941 comic book origin. Small changes like the truncation of last name “Cobblepot” to just “Cobb” lend to the reality established in “The Batman.” Ultimately, this version of the Penguin brings a depth to the character that feels honest to Oswald Cobblepot while still taking the creative liberties it needed to in order to create an incredible protagonist. Oz works for the Falcone crime family, but after the death of patriarch Carmine Falcone (played by John Turturro in “The Batman,” but Mark Strong during flashbacks in “The Penguin”) he is emboldened to try and push his way to the top. Oz’s goals contradict those of the new Falcone leadership: Carmine’s son Alberto (Michael Zegen) and Carmine’s daughter Sofia (Cristin Milioti), who was recently released from Arkham Asylum after serving a decade for a string of murders. This conflict comes to the forefront when Oz snaps and murders one of his fellow members of the Falcone mob. To help hide the body from the Falcones and the police, Oz recruits a young man he finds trying to steal one of his tires. From that point on, Victor Aguilar (Rhenzy Feliz) becomes Oz’s sidekick as he pits the Falcone and Maroni crime families against each other. As the show goes on, Victor, Sofia and Oz are all precisely characterized, each having their own dedicated arc. The slow and deliberate drip of new details keeps the audience in suspense as to the true motivations and origins of the three main characters, layering the past with the present to create an intense and focused drama. Aside from the stars, one other performance that it would be negligent not to mention is Clancy Brown’s chilling portrayal of Salvatore “Sal” Maroni, the patriarch of the Maroni family and one of the main antagonists. Sal is scarily resilient and uniquely hateful, creating the feeling that his defeat would be impossible. During “The Penguin,” Oz is constantly driven by a desire for others’ approval. This heavily influences one of the most fascinating and complex relationships in the show, the one between Oz and his mother Francis (Deirdre O’Connell). Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Francis is old and sick and constantly tells Oz how much more he could be doing for her. One warning sign of her more toxic traits comes when she calls him a “pussy” for being evasive with his mob enemies rather than killing them head-on. In the end, Francis and Oz’s mother-son relationship is irreversibly transformed by flashbacks in the final episodes of the show. Throughout the show, Oz is given plenty of heartfelt and loving moments with those around him. He is an inspiration to kids like him from crappy neighborhoods who could barely dream of rising as high as Oz — or at least that’s what he tells himself. Despite these moments, as the final credits roll on “The Penguin,” it’s hard to think about anything besides how evil he is. In the end, the only thing that really speaks to how evil the Penguin is the feeling deep in your gut as you watch the final scenes play out. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Trump secures second White House term with campaign built on authoritarian impulses Former President Donald Trump successfully edged out Vice President Kamala Harris to secure a second term in office, marking an era of authoritarian impulses and controversial rhetoric on immigrants and the economy. By Anna Kleiber November 6, 2024 | 11:48am CST Former President Donald Trump defeated Vice President Kamala Harris in a blowout 2024 presidential race, winning his second term in office. Trump — who was slapped with two impeachments, charged with plotting to overturn the 2020 election, survived an assassination attempt and was found liable for sexual abuse — marked his campaign with authoritarian impulses and controversial rhetoric on immigrants and drew accusations of fascism from his former White House officials. Early Wednesday morning, Wisconsin’s 10 electoral votes gave Trump the 270 he needed to secure the presidency. Along with Wisconsin, Trump won Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Georgia and is expected to win the remaining three battleground states. “This was a movement like no one has ever seen before,” Trump said after winning a series of battleground states. “Frankly, I believe this was the greatest political movement of all time.” With a second term, Trump previously promised to “liberate” the Midwest from “illegal aliens” through mass deportations, enact tariffs on a wide range of imported goods and bring “guaranteed” peace in the world. A major controversy of Trump’s campaign was his link to Project 2025, a 900-page document drafted by the conservative Heritage Foundation that lays out a roadmap for an overhaul of the U.S. government. While Project 2025 doesn’t explicitly call for a nationwide abortion ban, it proposes steps to further restrict the procedure and goes farther than Trump has said he would go on the issue. The plan would also cut funding to government organizations that promote the scientific consensus that human activity is responsible for climate change and would pull the U.S. out of the Paris Climate Agreement, which it labels as “climate fanaticism.” A lack of action on climate change would severely damage Wisconsin’s complex ecosystem through its effects on the migratory patterns of wildlife, and result in a crippled agricultural sector according to the Environmental Protection Agency. The nearly 3.4 million votes cast in Wisconsin is roughly 200,000 higher than the ballots cast in the 2020 presidential election. Trump won the state by 0.9% over Harris, or roughly 31,319 votes — just less than one percentage point. Trump's margin of victory looks similar to President Joe Biden’s margin of victory in Wisconsin in 2020, who beat Trump by a little over 20,000 votes, and Trump’s own victory in 2016 with a margin of 23,000 votes. In 2020, Biden beat Trump in the state by less than one percent of votes. NBC News reported Dane County was one of the seven counties that could decide the election. In the Democratic stronghold, Trump received 23.4% to Harris’ 75.1%, according to an independent data analysis from The Daily Cardinal. Harris underperformed in the county by 0.4% compared to Biden’s 75.5% in 2020. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email On University of Wisconsin-Madison campus wards, Harris underperformed by seven points compared to Biden in 2020, the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A photo of a Thanksgiving feast. Photo courtesy of Christopher Schmidt/Flickr SCIENCE Why does Thanksgiving dinner leave us so sleepy? The science behind post-Thanksgiving meal drowsiness. By Lindsay Pfeiffer November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST Thanksgiving is one week away, and with it comes time spent with family and friends, plentiful meals and the infamous Thanksgiving fatigue. But what exactly is the cause of this? Turkey contains tryptophan, which is an essential amino acid. It can be converted into a molecule called 5-HTP, which forms serotonin, a neurotransmitter that influences mood. Some of that serotonin is then converted into melatonin, which is important for circadian rhythm synchronization. Melatonin isn’t required for sleep, but at high levels, it increases sleep quality. Tryptophan isn’t naturally produced in the body, so we have to get it from our diet. Tryptophan is in all meat — turkey actually doesn’t contain any more than other meats. Three ounces of turkey has approximately 180 to 244 milligrams of tryptophan, while tryptophan supplements taken for sleep improvement typically are 5,000 milligrams. This means you’d have to eat up to 84 ounces of turkey to get to the same amount as a tryptophan supplement. What is the true Thanksgiving fatigue culprit? Multiple factors create post-meal drowsiness, and it’s simpler than you’d think. Thanksgiving dinner often includes large quantities of carbohydrates in the form of stuffing, pie, rolls and mashed potatoes. This can spike your blood sugar at first and later cause it to crash, making you feel sluggish. Additionally, there’s an increase in blood flow to your stomach to help deal with the large amount of food ingested. This leaves you feeling tired because there’s less blood in your brain. Your heart rate also drops as you relax to digest the food. The time of year also plays a role in post-meal sleepiness. November is accompanied by early darkness. The pineal gland, an endocrine gland in the brain, releases more melatonin when it’s dark. So, when Thanksgiving dinner takes place right before or when it’s dark, your body’s production of melatonin can leave you feeling groggy. Any alcohol consumed may make you feel more lethargic due to its depressant qualities. Once in the bloodstream, alcohol slows down neuron firing in the brain, resulting in relaxation and drowsiness. Its effects can also increase with overeating. How can you avoid post-meal fatigue this Thanksgiving? To stay alert after your Thanksgiving meal, try eating more slowly, avoiding overeating and limiting your alcohol. A post-meal walk can help regulate blood sugar and aid in digestion. Getting a good night's sleep beforehand can also help keep your energy levels up. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Maile Llanos | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE UW-Madison expert stresses importance of abortion access, urges voter action through research The Collaborative for Reproductive Equity conducts, translates and disseminates research, empowering Wisconsinites to make informed decisions about abortion rights. By Lily Spanbauer October 25, 2024 | 4:00am CDT An Avengers-like team of University of Wisconsin-Madison experts are uniting to research and promote civic engagement on the issue of abortion. “Good policy begins with good evidence,” said Amy Williamson, associate director and co-creator of the Collaborative for Reproductive Equity (CORE). CORE is a research initiative at UW-Madison School Of Medicine and Public Health focused on reproductive health, equity and autonomy. Their experts specialize in gender and women's studies, sociology, medicine, OB-GYN and public health, giving Wisconsinites the tools to make informed decisions. Williamson and other UW-Madison leaders established the initiative in 2018 following a decade of large shifts in reproductive health policy and access in Wisconsin. “We're researchers. We're at a university, so we saw our role, our power and our lane as research,” Williamson told The Daily Cardinal. “How can we use that to help people who don't sit in the university build awareness of issues of policies and impact that they may use for civic engagement, policy, programs and law?” In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, ending the constitutional right to abortion. Following the decision, an 1849 law banning abortion with no exceptions for rape or incest went in to effect in Wisconsin. Clinics stopped offering abortion services in the state until last September, when a Dane County Circuit Court judge ruled the 1849 law applied only to feticide, not consensual abortions. Wisconsin Planned Parenthood (PPWI) has since resumed abortion services in three clinics in Madison, Milwaukee and Sheboygan, and Affiliated Medical Services performs abortion services at its Milwaukee clinic. People working in the field of women’s health care had seen signals the Supreme Court would overturn Roe according to Williamson, so when it eventually happened, CORE felt the obligation and immediacy of conducting research that would illuminate its negative effects. “We went into overdrive,” Williamson said. “We went into high gear to evaluate and understand the impact of the changes on people who need care, on families, on health care providers, on people who care for people who can be pregnant or who are pregnant.” CORE gathered qualitative evidence through patient interviews and focus groups and quantitative data through surveys and analysis of health care utilization datasets needed to answer their questions. The post-Roe landscape has resulted in a host of negative effects on women and other people capable of pregnancy, according to a CORE brief. These include increases in pregnancy-related mortality, immediate and long-lasting effects on mental health, increases in chronic health problems, increases in intimate partner violence and a restricted ability to achieve educational, career and other life aspirations. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email During the 15 months where no clinics in Wisconsin offered abortion services, CORE conducted a study with individuals who were pregnant to examine the financial, health and family related decisions that they made in the absence of access to care. CORE is still analyzing the data from this study, so it hasn’t been published yet, but Williamson said the study’s interviews provided a profound insight into the complexity of accessing health care under the abortion ban. “I feel the importance of sharing that truth can't be underestimated,” Williamson said. “It's no question the most profound insight comes from the experiences of real people.” CORE also translates and disseminates research. Translation is all about making research accessible to different audiences to “meet people where they are,” Williamson said. “We're talking about both using plain language and explaining what is done in accessible terms, but also utilizing different forms, whether it's a short brief, a fact sheet or infographics on social media,” Williamson said. Once the research is accessible in terms of understanding, they shift to dissemination — making it physically accessible for the people who need it most. CORE disseminates through direct outreach to individuals, sharing information to organizations and making it available to legislators. Although CORE’s research topics connect with issues on the ballot, Williamson said CORE stays out of politics to keep their focus squarely on research. But Williamson does encourage people to vote and believes that CORE can be one of many sources of information that voters consult before hitting the polls. “We want to be a trusted source of evidence,” Williamson said. “Our reason for being is that our work helps decision-makers, policymakers and just regular people like you and me make informed decisions, and informed decisions includes people's assessment of the issues that matter.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Danez Smith speaks at Wisconsin Book Festival Oct. 18. Photo courtesy by Shanna Wolf. ARTS Poet Danez Smith marvels crowd with raw lyricism on social justice at Wisconsin Book Festival The poet performed a selection of their new book “Bluff” to kick off the 23rd annual fall celebration. By Marit Erickson October 28, 2024 | 10:14am CDT On the crisp evening of Oct. 18, Madison’s literary community flocked to Central Library for a celebration of author Danez Smith’s new poetry collection, “Bluff.” “Bluff” is the result of Smith’s years-long examination of social justice issues, including the Palestinian liberation movement and George Floyd’s death, and how society perpetuates these inequalities. The Twin Cities native received their undergraduate degree at the University of Wisconsin-Madison as a part of the First Wave Hip Hop & Urban Arts Scholarship Program. Since graduating, their career has flourished, having received the Lambda Literary Award for Gay Poetry, the Kate Tufts Discovery Award and the Forward Prize. They’ve published three previous works: “[insert] boy,” “Don’t Call Us Dead” and “Homie.” The night opened with a statement by Smith’s former professor Nate Marshall, who described his close relationship with the poet. Fellow First Wave member Diya Abbas performed three poems and introduced Smith with a glowing review of “Bluff.” Smith took the stage with a familiarity few poets exhibit. Their spoken word roots bled into this reading, holding the audience captive with charisma, humor and raw honesty. “Bluff” contemplates morality, identity, family, death and injustice. Smith asks the audience and themself: how can one be an artist and fully contribute to change? Is poetry enough in the battle against corruption? Is it okay for one’s art to contribute to the capitalism that fuels American colonialism? “The poem is still a border…a cage…I do know that it’s fuel,” they said. Art is insufficient in the fight for equality and social justice, but it can help individuals work through the horror inflicted upon them, Smith said. Poetry can heal. Specifically, “Bluff” heals. The collection responds to atrocities around the world, both overseas in Palestine and in Smith’s hometown of Minneapolis. After the death of George Floyd, Smith took a hiatus from writing, saying, “I had to move with my hands, with my actions.” On the anthology’s second poem, “ars america (in the hold),” Smith suggested, “there is no art in America but violence.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Another standout poem from the book is “Last Black American Poem,” in which Smith peels the curtain back on former President Barack Obama’s presidency. “I don’t want a Black colonizer,” they said. “My politics will not be satisfied by a mirror.” In “less hope” Smith played with emphasis and volume, changing their delivery after the volta by flipping their tone from an outraged declaration to a somber finish. The Palestinian tribute, “poem,” incorporated audience participation, as Smith made the whole room shout “Free Palestine” 21 times. Other poems in this collection are more personal. There are ruminations over Smith’s sexual and gender identity after growing up in a Baptist home. In “Colorado Springs,” Smith reflects on a conversation with their grandmother about homosexuality in the Black community. “I will not allow myself to exist in a system that is volatile to me,” Smith said after the poem. Their poem “rondo” plays with form by including a wide black rectangle cutting through the page, scattering words in each direction. The line represents Interstate Highway 94 that cut through Smith’s childhood neighborhood in St. Paul. As a final farewell, Smith told the audience that “art is a great space to practice the truth.” In “Bluff,” the Wisconsin alumni does that to perfection. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Students walk in to the polling site for the April 2023 general elections. Photo by Alexa Coleman | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Election season has ended. Civic engagement shouldn’t end with it When volunteers only push for political engagement before an election, their motives are rarely sincere. By Lauren Stoneman November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST For the past few months, University of Wisconsin-Madison students and Madison locals have patted themselves on the back for their civic engagement. They have stood on the streets with clipboards, canvassed door-to-door and enthusiastically directed new voters to registration tables and polling places. This effort to get citizens to the polls is important. But on its own, it feels a little insincere. If you were to ask any of these volunteers why they’re sacrificing their time, you’d be hit with a wave of platitudes about the importance of civic engagement. You’d hear a string of truisms about exercising our rights as citizens. Up close, though, every volunteer has their own reasons for getting involved. Each will inevitably be more interested in engaging with one half of the political spectrum. They’ll be much more eager to see people exercise their right to vote for a certain candidate. Granted, in an election that has become as hostile and as inescapable as this one, it’s impossible not to have an opinion. It would take a saint not to have personal, partisan motivations for getting involved. But most of the volunteers I spoke to didn’t seem to care what I knew about politics or civics at all provided I cast my ballot early — and cast it the right way. All of the efforts stop as soon as the polls close. For the rest of the year, you’re all but guaranteed to walk on campus without anyone imploring you to be politically informed or to pursue a civic education. The results of this neglect are clear. A recent survey by the American Council of Trustees and Alumni shows an alarmingly low level of civics literacy among college students. Only 32% of students understand the impeachment process, despite living through two recent trials. 27% could identify Vice President Kamala Harris as the president of the U.S. Senate. This has to change. The values that election volunteers purport to hold don’t materialize in the two weeks before an election. When the public is inundated with partisan messaging, they’re practically predisposed to tune out the noise. Instead, emphasizing civic engagement and education should be a year-round pursuit. This effort is perhaps most easily carried out in a university setting. Universities can offer or even require civics courses. Students can seek those courses out. Schools can host panels and promote literature on the American political process. They can even sponsor outreach projects to educate younger generations, emulating programs like the University of Chicago’s Civic Knowledge Project. UW-Madison has already taken admiral steps in the right direction. In September, students instituted a new chapter of BridgeUSA with the goal of fostering dialogue across the political spectrum. In October, the Morgridge Center for Public Service hosted a panel on the role of higher education in shaping civic engagement and democracy. Recently, the university sent out a Student Campus Climate Survey in order to learn more about the political environment on campus. Of course, all of these initiatives popped up in the flurry of election season. Regardless, they’re a promising start. They have given us a unique chance to keep momentum after all the ballots are cast. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Think ahead. Four years from now, we will feel much more comfortable pushing people to the polls if we spend this time building a civically informed public. Lauren Stoneman is a senior studying history, philosophy and political science. Do you agree that we need to prioritize civic education year-round? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lauren StonemanLauren Stoneman is an opinions editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Courtesy of MGM Pictures ARTS The ‘Bottoms’ phenomenon: Why the indie film is resonating with audiences in Madison and elsewhere This film is very aware of its overexaggerated portrayal of high school and doesn't take itself too seriously. By Gabriella Hartlaub September 14, 2023 | 3:00am CDT My friends and I set off on a journey last weekend to see “Bottoms,” directed by Emma Seligman. The film's opening weekend was marked by disappointment for many people, including myself, as the film was only available in about 10 theaters nationwide, with the closest one to Madison being in Chicago. Despite its limited release, the film grossed over $450,000 in its opening weekend, a high number when the amount of theaters showing the film is factored in. Week two brought more theaters into the mix, leading me to the Marcus Palace Cinema in Sun Prairie. The movie itself had all the makings of a cult classic: up-and-coming actresses, a heartfelt coming-of-age story and, most notably, a semi-empty theater for the 6:30 p.m. showing. But what our theater lacked in numbers, it made up for in laughter. The first thing you should know about “Bottoms” is that it’s a gay movie. The film’s main characters, PJ (Rachel Sennot) and Josie (Ayo Edibiri), are out lesbians. It's PJ and Josie’s love for women which drives them to create a girls-only fight club so they can gain the attention of popular cheerleaders Brittany (Kaia Gerber) and Isabel (Havana Rose Liu). In many ways, “Bottoms” is your typical high school movie. The nerd intends to win the cheerleader away from her football quarterback boyfriend with the backdrop of an incredibly overhyped football game. And in a lot of other ways, it isn’t your typical high school movie. Even in 2023, it’s impressive to see two lesbian main characters — especially ones who are out like PJ and Josie — and to have the plot revolve around their romantic aspirations. There’s also a borderline copious amount of blood in this film, both in the fight club scenes and in the eventual final fight which takes place during the aforementioned football game. I won’t spoil anything else about it because it's truly something you have to see for yourself. This film is very aware of its overexaggerated portrayal of high school and doesn't take itself too seriously. In fact, you’d be hard pressed to find a moment where the film takes itself seriously at all. One of my complaints about the film is a seeming lack of accountability — both to itself and to its characters. We root for Josie and PJ throughout the film, but it’s hard not to find yourself wondering why they never face consequences for their actions. In the end, whenever or however you can see “Bottoms” — see “Bottoms”. More than anything else, this movie is fun. And if you won’t take my word for it, take the word of the woman in my theater who, by the end of the movie, had laughed so furiously she was all but out of breath. This movie is a great time. Once you see it, it’s easy to see why it’s as sought after as it is. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Molly Sheehan | The Daily Cardinal SPORTS Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights With the year coming to an end, it’s time to look at some moments that defined Wisconsin Badgers athletics. By Yadi Chavez December 8, 2024 | 2:36pm CST December marks a transitional period of sorts when it comes to collegiate sports. Some sports like football and soccer have seen their last action until 2025. Women’s volleyball is competing in the NCAA tournament, and the hockey and basketball season is starting to pick up as we head into the new year. While there is plenty to look forward to in the new year, it’s worthwhile to reminisce on a handful of achievements that Bucky gave us in 2024. Men’s soccer and their early season spark The Wisconsin Badgers men’s soccer team provided an exciting start to their season that hadn’t been seen in quite some time. With no votes in the national preseason poll before regular season play began, the Badgers would go on to prove that they deserved much more attention than anyone initially gave them. The Badgers ended September with a 6-1-1 record and were ranked No. 8 in the United Soccer Coaches Top 25 NCAA poll off the back of a youth movement happening in Madison. Freshman forward Dean Boltz exploded onto the national scene during the Badgers’ hot start. Boltz totaled eight goals and three assists in the first eight games of the Badgers season, giving him serious consideration for Freshman of the Year honors. But this blazing start wouldn’t last long, as the team would go 1-4-2 in the games following the start of October. This lackluster finish to the season narrowly denied a Big Ten Tournament bid for the Wisconsin Badgers. Despite the heartbreaking end of the season, there is much to be confident about when thinking about the overall picture. Boltz ended up being named the Big Ten Freshman of the Year and landed on the All-Big Ten Second team. Wisconsin now has the key goal of trying to maintain the components of this season to build on in 2025. If the early start showed us anything, this team has the pieces to be a real threat to the Big Ten and the entire nation if they can put it all together. Women’s soccer’s NCAA tournament run Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The 2024 Wisconsin Badgers women’s soccer program saw a continuation of the foundations laid in its 2023 season. Posting a 10-6-5 record in the regular season, the Badgers turned their game up in the last five games of the season, winning four of their last five. Similar to the men’s soccer team, the women’s soccer team had a prolific goal scorer who helped propel them to postseason success. Graduate student Aryssa Mahrt scored 10 goals alongside four assists on the season. On top of the Mahrt’s scoring boost, four other teammates had multiple goals on the season. Even if Mahrt stood out as the lead goal scorer, there were plenty of options for the team when looking for a goal. Although they lost in the first round of the Big Ten Tournament against Ohio State, the Badgers pushed on toward the fifth seed in the NCAA soccer tournament. Wisconsin jumped to a 2-0 lead over Maine in the first three minutes of their first-round matchup thanks to goals from Mahrt and senior Ashely Martinez. It would be smooth sailing from there, leaving with a 3-1 win when the final whistle blew. Next was a trip to Irvine, California, to face off against the No. 4 Virginia Cavaliers. The game was a tense one, with the two squads having to conduct a shootout to crown a winner after a stalemate in overtime. The Badgers made each of their four shots, and after the Cavaliers missed their second shot out of four, Wisconsin sealed the upset win. The Wisconsin Badgers were going to the Sweet Sixteen for the first time since 2021. In the Sweet Sixteen, the Badgers faced the No. 1 USC Trojans. Unfortunately for the team, this would be the end of their season. USC jumped out to a 3-0 lead, and despite a late goal from midfielder Dara Andringa, the game ended 3-1 for the Trojans. Aside from the sour end, the women’s program has much to appreciate when thinking about the 2024 season. They’ll have to retool a bit next year, but another NCAA Tournament run shouldn’t be out of the picture for this team. Men’s basketball beats Purdue in Big Ten Semifinal To round off the list, we’ve got an iconic game in Wisconsin men’s basketball lore. Before heading into the Big Ten Tournament in the 2023-24 season, the Badgers were on the brink of collapse. Losing eight of their last 11 games of the regular season, the hot start they saw to begin the year started to fade. And then the Big Ten Tournament started. A convincing win against Maryland in the first round set them up for a second-round matchup against the fourth-seed Northwestern Wildcats. After breaking away with a 70-61 win, it was time for the semifinal against a familiar foe. Wisconsin played Purdue twice in the regular season, both contests ending in close fashion. A combined 14-point differential in both games showed that the Badgers could keep up with the top-ranked Boilermakers. This matchup proved to be no different, as both teams posted the same number of points in each half. With the score tied at 70 apiece, the two went to overtime. After two made free throws by NBA lottery pick Zach Edey, Purdue was up by three with 46 seconds to go in overtime. The Badgers would have to rally quickly if they wanted to be in the Big Ten Championship. And rally they did. A Chucky Hepburn layup and an offensive foul committed by Purdue gave the Badgers the chance to take the lead with 22 seconds left. With the score being 75-74 Purdue, it was time for someone to make their moment. Junior Max Klesmit made the play of his life, hitting a floater with 4.8 seconds left in overtime to give the Badgers the lead. The clutch bucket proved to be enough, as Purdue simply didn’t have enough time to respond. The Badgers were moving on to the Big Ten Championship. After a shaky end to the regular season, The Wisconsin Badgers men’s basketball team showed resilience in the Big Ten Tournament that everyone had to respect. After their hot start this season, one could point to this game as the moment the Badgers really stepped into their own as a unit. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
University of Wisconsin-Madison graduate student union members of the Teaching Assistants' Association occupied the Wisconsin State Capitol in 2011 to protest of Act 10, a proposal supported by Gov. Scott Walker and Republican lawmakers that would limit collective bargaining rights for public employees. Photo by Daily Cardinal archives | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Dane County judge strikes down more than 60 sections of Act 10 Dane County Circuit Court Judge Jacob Frost ruled over 60 sections of Wisconsin’s 2011 Act 10 law that curb collective bargaining rights for public sector unions are unconstitutional. By Julia Walkowicz December 2, 2024 | 7:19pm CST Dane County Circuit Court Judge Jacob Frost struck down more than 60 sections of Wisconsin’s 2011 Act 10 law that curbed collective bargaining rights for public sector unions in a ruling Monday. Frost’s ruling came after his opinion allowed lawsuits to continue against former Republican Gov. Scott Walker’s restrictions on public sector employee union size and power after denying a motion filed by the Republican-controlled Legislature to dismiss the case. Efforts to overturn the 13-year-old law began in November 2023, when several unions of public employees cited low pay, staffing shortages and poor conditions for work culminating in a “dire situation” in the workplace. The lawsuit argued that Act 10’s distinction between “general” and “public safety” employees violated equal protection guarantees of the Wisconsin Constitution. “Public safety” employees, such as police officers and firefighters, were unaffected by the law. For “general” employees, the bill curbed their collective bargaining rights and placed caps on wage increase negotiations to no more than the rate of inflation. Act 10 gave rise to a dramatic decrease in union membership, leading to less power for public servants in larger negotiations. Frost described the distinction between “general” and “public safety” employees as "irrational.” "I cannot solve Act 10's constitutional problems by striking the definition of 'public safety employee,' leaving the term undefined and leaving the remainder of the law in place," he wrote in Monday's ruling. In Monday’s ruling, Frost determined that several sections of Act 55, a follow-up to Act 10 in 2015, were also no longer enforceable. In a joint statement Monday, plaintiffs in the lawsuit commended Frost’s ruling while also noting it still has to make its way through the court’s system. "Today's decision is personal for me and my coworkers," conservation warden and AFSCME Local 1215 President Ben Gruber said in a statement. "As a conservation warden, having full collective bargaining rights means we will again have a voice on the job to improve our workplace and make sure that Wisconsin is a safe place for everyone. We realize there may still be a fight ahead of us in the courts, but make no mistake, we're ready to keep fighting until we all have a seat at the table again." In a separate statement Monday, the Teaching Assistants’ Association (TAA) celebrated the decision and called on the University of Wisconsin-Madison to voluntarily recognize the union. “The winds of change are blowing in our direction and we urge the university to take note and voluntarily recognize the TAA as the union of graduate workers and be prepared to meet us at the bargaining table,” Daniel Levitin, co-president of the TAA, said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Republican Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, who has staunchly defended the law, criticized Frost’s ruling in a statement Monday as fruitless. “This lawsuit came more than a decade after Act 10 became law and after many courts rejected the same meritless legal challenges. Act 10 has saved Wisconsin taxpayers more than $16 billion. We look forward to presenting our arguments on appeal,” Vos said. Walker called the decision “brazen political activism” on X, saying Frost’s ruling “makes the April 2025 Wisconsin Supreme Court race that much more important.” Senate Minority Leader Sen. Dianne Hesselbein, D-Middleton, applauded Frost’s ruling in a statement Monday. “This is a crucial step to recognize and restore the rights of hard-working public employees doing the people’s work in every corner of Wisconsin,” Hesselbein said. “There are likely further hurdles ahead and I applaud the resolve of those who have kept up the effort to restore the right to collectively bargain in the state.” Editor's note: this article was updated at 8:36 p.m. CDT on Monday, Dec. 2, 2024, to add a statement from the TAA. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A photo of a Thanksgiving feast. Photo courtesy of Christopher Schmidt/Flickr SCIENCE Why does Thanksgiving dinner leave us so sleepy? The science behind post-Thanksgiving meal drowsiness. By Lindsay Pfeiffer November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST Thanksgiving is one week away, and with it comes time spent with family and friends, plentiful meals and the infamous Thanksgiving fatigue. But what exactly is the cause of this? Turkey contains tryptophan, which is an essential amino acid. It can be converted into a molecule called 5-HTP, which forms serotonin, a neurotransmitter that influences mood. Some of that serotonin is then converted into melatonin, which is important for circadian rhythm synchronization. Melatonin isn’t required for sleep, but at high levels, it increases sleep quality. Tryptophan isn’t naturally produced in the body, so we have to get it from our diet. Tryptophan is in all meat — turkey actually doesn’t contain any more than other meats. Three ounces of turkey has approximately 180 to 244 milligrams of tryptophan, while tryptophan supplements taken for sleep improvement typically are 5,000 milligrams. This means you’d have to eat up to 84 ounces of turkey to get to the same amount as a tryptophan supplement. What is the true Thanksgiving fatigue culprit? Multiple factors create post-meal drowsiness, and it’s simpler than you’d think. Thanksgiving dinner often includes large quantities of carbohydrates in the form of stuffing, pie, rolls and mashed potatoes. This can spike your blood sugar at first and later cause it to crash, making you feel sluggish. Additionally, there’s an increase in blood flow to your stomach to help deal with the large amount of food ingested. This leaves you feeling tired because there’s less blood in your brain. Your heart rate also drops as you relax to digest the food. The time of year also plays a role in post-meal sleepiness. November is accompanied by early darkness. The pineal gland, an endocrine gland in the brain, releases more melatonin when it’s dark. So, when Thanksgiving dinner takes place right before or when it’s dark, your body’s production of melatonin can leave you feeling groggy. Any alcohol consumed may make you feel more lethargic due to its depressant qualities. Once in the bloodstream, alcohol slows down neuron firing in the brain, resulting in relaxation and drowsiness. Its effects can also increase with overeating. How can you avoid post-meal fatigue this Thanksgiving? To stay alert after your Thanksgiving meal, try eating more slowly, avoiding overeating and limiting your alcohol. A post-meal walk can help regulate blood sugar and aid in digestion. Getting a good night's sleep beforehand can also help keep your energy levels up. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin The Department of Education forms the foundation of Wisconsin’s education system. Trump shouldn’t dismantle it. By Maya Morvis December 5, 2024 | 4:00am CST President-elect Donald Trump’s call to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education may sound like a bold move toward decentralizing control and restoring local power. But for Wisconsin’s public schools, it’s a risky proposition that could destabilize the very foundation of our education system. The Department of Education plays a crucial role in ensuring equitable access to resources for K-12 schools and higher education institutions. Without it, Wisconsin could face significant challenges that would further deepen the divide between wealthy and underfunded districts, particularly in rural areas. Federal funds, including Title I aid for low-income schools and special education funding, are critical to Wisconsin’s educational system. These programs help ensure that schools with the most need are able to offer a fair and equal education for all students. If Trump’s plan to eliminate the department comes to fruition, this funding could be at risk, forcing local districts to pick up the slack. In a state where education funding is already a hot-button issue, this would likely lead to budget cuts, teacher layoffs or tax increases to cover the loss. Low-income students, students of color and those in rural areas would be hit hardest, losing access to programs and support that help level the playing field. Moreover, eliminating the department would create a patchwork of state and local education policies, potentially leading to a fragmented educational experience for Wisconsin’s students. National standards on testing, teacher qualifications and school safety regulations would vanish, leaving each state to determine its own rules. This could create a situation where students in Wisconsin’s wealthier districts continue to receive high-quality education, while those in underfunded areas are left behind. Inconsistent policies would also make it harder for families to navigate the educational system and ensure that their children are receiving a fair education. The impact on higher education would also be felt across the state. Many Wisconsin students rely on federal student aid, including Pell Grants and student loans, to attend college. If the Department of Education is dismantled, tuition rates could skyrocket, and colleges may become less accessible for low-income students. Furthermore, the department enforces Title IX protections for students against discrimination, ensuring that all students, regardless of gender, are treated equally. Without this protection, Wisconsin’s colleges and universities could face increased legal challenges and potential violations of students’ rights. Proponents of the plan argue that eliminating the Department of Education would give states and local communities more control over their educational systems. They claim that federal oversight stifles innovation and imposes a one-size-fits-all approach that doesn’t work for every state. Advocates for local control, including Trump’s supporters, believe communities have a better understanding of their needs. They also argue that federal overreach has led to the politicization of education, with national mandates like Common Core stifling local decision-making. While this argument holds some merit, it ignores the larger issues of equity that exist within Wisconsin’s education system. The federal government’s involvement ensures that low-income districts and rural areas have access to the same resources as wealthier, more urban areas. Local control can work well for some districts, but it can also widen the gap for those that need support the most. Rather than eliminating the Department of Education, a better approach would be to reform it, making it more responsive to the needs of local communities while still ensuring that equity and accessibility remain at the forefront of educational policy. Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin’s students and educators. The risks of cutting off federal funding, creating fragmented policies and undermining higher education outweigh the potential benefits of local control. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If we truly want to ensure that every student in Wisconsin has access to a high-quality education, we must look at ways to strengthen, not dismantle, the institutions that support it. Our students deserve better than the uncertainty that would come from eliminating the very agency that guarantees their right to an equitable education. Maya Morvis is a sophomore studying journalism and political science. Do you agree that the Department of Education is necessary for Wisconsin schools? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo courtesy of Peter Kiessewalter. ARTS Kiesewalter and La Grange’s The Moth Project takes flight in Madison The Moth Project is an immersive show about moths that blends science, music and art into a hopeful allusion of the human experience. By Sonia Bendre November 7, 2024 | 4:00am CST It’s easy to think of the moth as the boring, less colorful relative of the butterfly. But The Moth Project explores the forgotten insect with new levels of music and videography. The Moth Project began on Oct. 24 at the Overture Center with a white background and two performers, Peter Kiesewalter, dressed in white with dark-shaded, white-rimmed sunglasses, and his partner Whitney La Grange. Kiesewalter expressed gratitude for being able to perform at the Overture Center and poked at the similarities between the Midwest and Ottawa, Canada, where The Moth Project was conceived — the abundance of natural beauty, the weather and even some of the same moth species. Then, the lights dimmed. Kiesewalter walked to the electric piano as La Grange got into position on the violin. The first song came to life on the screen with a visual of the spinning planet Earth: “Welcome to My Haus.” The title of the song hints at Kiesewalter’s German heritage and the tone of the show, which is equal parts playful and personal. Moths transitioned from nocturnal insect to lifestyle quickly for Kiesewalter when his brother, an interpretive naturalist, started collecting photographs of them during pandemic season in Canada. Kiesewatler proudly displayed his collection of moth photographs. Among his favorites is the luna moth, a green beauty with eyespots like half-moons on its wings, a type of moth that emerges from its cocoon with vestigial mouthparts and thus only days or hours to live. And what they do with that time, mostly, is have sex. The emergence and subsequent activities of the moth inspire two songs. The first is “Emergence,” a poppy, upbeat track with a motif reminiscent of “Flight of the Bumblebee” in the twenty-first century. Kiesewalter powered on the piano and vocals (hitting some impressive high notes), and La Grange played the difficult song on the violin with impressive consistency. The second song is “Pheromones,” a slow love song which starts with Kiesewalter crooning into a vocoder and features videos of intimate moth activities. Throughout the show, the lyrics continually surprised the audience. I especially enjoyed listening to “Death,” a mashup of KISS’s “Beth,” a Virginia Woolf essay about the death of a moth and Mozart’s “The Magic Flute.” Kiesewalter’s creativity came from an online thesaurus, painstaking hours of songwriting and science tips from his brother. Sometimes humorous and other times deeply personal, The Moth Project is fresh, experimental and most of all, fun. With the show, Kiesewalter aimed to raise viewers’ awareness about the natural world. It is a significant tonal shift from most media in the environmentalism movement, which tends to be negative. The Moth Project, on the other hand, celebrates the natural world. I left wanting to learn more about moths, and I had a more concrete idea of who I would be protecting by living sustainably. Kiesewater said botanist Robin Wall Kimmerer inspired parts of the show. Her voice is featured in the song “Reciprocity,” reading a chapter of her book “Braiding Sweetgrass” while La Grange plays a beautiful rendition of “Clair de Lune” by Claude Debussy. Like “Braiding Sweetgrass,” The Moth Project has a more positive and hopeful mood than a plain call-to-action. As Kimmerer tries to inject emotionality and a sense of being into her gardens, Kiesewalter tells not just the facts but the story of the moth, whether it is just emerging from a cocoon, traveling great distances or immolating itself on a flame, allowing people to see themselves in the creatures. During the show, as expected, Kiesewalter spent a lot of time talking about moths. But he also found a way to connect their journeys to the human condition. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email For example, the moth’s migration was framed as an allegory for Kiesewalter’s parents’ immigration from Germany to Canada in the 1950s. The song “Emergence,” Kiesewalter said, alludes to the experience of coming out. The show ended with a cover of Joni Mitchell’s “The Case of You” set to pictures of Kiesewalter’s family. From zydeco to classical to pop, the protean music reflected the diversity of moth species in the show’s videography. Peter Kiesewalter played an electric piano and sang, while La Grange, a Juilliard-trained violinist, played hauntingly beautiful melodies. Kiesewalter’s subject matter was similarly diverse, musing about moths’ motivations to kill themselves over flames in “Immolation,” the process of exiting the cocoon in “Emergence” and comparing their journeys to human migration in “Migration.” The song and videography of “Flight” was a standout — a series of high-res, slow-motion videos of moths jumping into the air with their wings fanning out behind them. If scientists are looking for a way to make people pay attention to nature again, The Moth Project is doing the right work. It is the antithesis of a dry list of facts or a compilation of depressing statistics. It is a performance with a human dimension, one full of excitement, contemplation and joy. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS As cities and schools turn to referendums to fill budget gaps, officials debate their effectiveness With several referendums on the Nov. 5 ballot, local leaders have mixed feelings about their effectiveness. By Vanessa Gavilan October 25, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Dane County has six referendums appearing on the Nov. 5 ballot, and voters must make the decision that is meant to give them a voice in funding and approving local policy. Of these six referendums, four ask voters to approve property tax increases in Madison, Monona, Fitchburg and the village of McFarland beyond what is otherwise allowed under the state’s levy limit. The other two would provide funding to the Madison Metropolitan School District (MMSD) for facility upgrades and staff wages. Madison depends heavily on property taxes to fund city operations — drawing over 70% of its annual revenue from the property tax levy — but state law caps the amount each municipality can increase taxes at around 2%. The additional 5% of property tax raises to cover city operations would need to come from a referendum in order to bypass the current limit.. FairVote, a nationwide nonpartisan organization focused on voting reforms, told The Daily Cardinal referendums like the ones proposed in Madison and other municipalities are very important to local communities. “[Referendums] empower voters, who can directly adopt reforms that improve their government and their lives,” said Deb Otis, the director of research and policy at FairVote. “When a dysfunctional government has stood in the way of policy desired by the majority of voters, ballot measures gave that majority a voice.” District 17 Ald. Sabrina Madison echoed Otis’s statement and said in a blog post “supporting the referendum is an investment in the future of our district.” But other voters believe referendums are an imperfect last resort to meet community needs, and though officials look to alleviate immediate budget gaps, the rising costs of services means municipalities and school districts may need to put referendums on the ballot again in the future. Insufficient shared revenue leaves referendums as ‘only vehicles’ to fund programs Whitman Bottari, communications director for the University of Wisconsin-Madison College Democrats, told the Cardinal local referendums “are the only vehicles we have at this point to fund vital programs.” Bottari cited the state’s Shared Revenue Program, now called the County and Municipal Aid Program, as one of the devices that caused Dane County to need a referendum to raise additional funds. The program distributes a portion of the state’s revenue to local governments using a loose formula that provides each county a valuation based on aidable revenue and per capita balances. The amount of shared revenue distributed to local governments steadily decreased from 2004 until the state boosted funding last year, and Madison has consistently received less per capita than the rest of the state. The state’s second-largest city collects just $29 per person in shared revenues compared to the statewide average of $195, according to a 2024 report from the Wisconsin Policy Forum, a nonpartisan policy research organization. District 10 Ald. Yannette Figueroa Cole said in a blog post a property tax referendum “would not be necessary if Madison simply received the average rate of shared revenue.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Figueroa Cole added Madison’s referendum to raise property taxes would not need to be imposed on voters if the city could raise taxes elsewhere. The city is not authorized to raise a local sales tax. MMSD blames state shortcomings These structural issues extend to the MMSD referendums. Edell Fiedel, senior director of communications for MMSD, told the Cardinal revenue gaps only occur because state legislation does not adequately support the district. Fiedel said MMSD has a revenue gap of $30.2 million for 2023-2025 due to the fact that “support from the state — which is holding billions of taxpayer dollars in reserve — did not keep pace with inflation.” These problems of support extend beyond the city of Madison. More than 120 Wisconsin school districts have placed referendums on the Nov. 5 ballot to receive help with operating expenses and facilities improvements, according to Fiedel. The Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) federal fund, which provided funds to school districts across the nation during the pandemic, expired last month, putting more financial pressure on districts. While lawmakers have added almost $1 billion in funding for education to the state budget, districts still fall short of the adequate funding, Fiedel said. “If our legislators were more committed to investing in the outcomes of Wisconsin students, districts like ours wouldn't continually need to rely so heavily on taxpayer dollars to operate and modernize,” Fiedel said. Both the city and MMSD said the community could potentially expect further referendums down the line if changes aren’t made to policy. “Without changes to current legislation that translate to increased state-level support for public education, districts across Wisconsin, including ours, will have to continue to rely on taxpayer support to undertake large-scale capital improvement projects and make necessary investments in current and future generations of students,” MMSD said on their website. The Office of the Mayor said in a press release that the current referendum will balance the budget until 2030 but that additional special charges could be implemented starting in 2027 for future budget gaps. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
A shelf of books at College Library on October 19, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Nicholas Duda | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘An affront to individual conscience and curiosity’: Librarian speaks out against book banning’s effects in Wisconsin A Wisconsin librarian told The Daily Cardinal banning books can suppress the voices of marginalized communities and curtail freedom of expression. By Joseph Panzer October 24, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Oshkosh Public Library director Darryl Eschete has dealt with calls for censorship of public libraries for years as a librarian in Louisiana, Iowa and now in Wisconsin. He is wary of the rising challenges to literature and its effect on individual liberty and the right to information. A quarter of Wisconsin school districts have received challenges to a combined total of 1,617 books since 2020, with 667 books being removed or age restricted. “‘Banning’ — forbidding the public from being able to find information or works of expression — is the easy question for me: it’s unacceptable,” Eschete told The Daily Cardinal. “It’s the worst kind of social control and shows a great lack of faith in people being able to discern what kinds of information is worthy of consideration or that they need in their lives.” Calls to ban books have found a foothold in the Wisconsin Legislature through bills such as AB 309, which would have banned the use of school funds for the purchase of “obscene” material, according to a report from PEN America. Book bans violate the First Amendment and make children less likely to become informed voters as adults, according to the ACLU of Wisconsin. Although libraries in Oshkosh have relatively low pressure to remove books, Eschete is on guard about what these bans mean for the accessibility of knowledge in public libraries. “I think the outright banning or removal of any information by governmental forces, however powerless otherwise, (like a library board), is an affront to individual conscience and curiosity,” he said. Eschete also believes challenging books “breeds both paranoia and contempt” of others in a way that is not conducive to good political discourse. “The only contact I’ve had from anyone who wanted to see anything removed or restricted came early last spring from a local policy maker who met with me to express that she thought some of the material we had in the children’s area was inappropriate,” Eschete said. “We met and discussed it openly, and the matter blew over.” The National Women’s Law Center posits that challenges to books with LGBTQ+, feminist or racial themes silences the voices of marginalized communities in literature and sends a message that these identities are not wanted. Books act as tools for children to reflect on their lives, peer into the lives of others and develop empathy, according to the Mirrors, Windows and Sliding Glass Doors metaphor by children’s literature expert Rudine Sims Bishop. Exposure to unfamiliar viewpoints can help develop children into more informed future voters by making them aware of the struggles of others, the ACLU of Wisconsin argued. The American Library Association found that the majority of the most frequently challenged books in 2022 were targeted for LGBTQ+ content and alleged sexually explicit material (“Gender Queer” by Maia Kobabe) with other issues including race relations (Toni Morrison’s “The Bluest Eye) and drug use (Ellen Hopkins’ “Crank”). Eschete views this as censorship that opposes liberty and intellectual progress. Over half of American adults, regardless of party affiliation, oppose book banning in schools in spite of vocal efforts by prominent right-wing politicians and advocacy groups to pull books from shelves, according to a poll conducted by NPR. Book challengers often use information from larger national groups when deciding what books to target, according to Wisconsin Watch. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One leading organization is Moms for Liberty, which the Southern Poverty Law Center classifies as an extremist group. In their 111-page document on what books they challenge, the group singles out allegedly “vulgar” quotes from books found in high schools written predominantly by LGBTQ+ people, people of color and women to argue why they should be pulled from shelves. Despite the current nature of book challenges, Eschete’s ultimate warning to prospective censors is that this can eventually become a double-edged sword. “One tactic I’ve used in my career is explaining — truthfully — to someone upset about a book that no matter what ideological or sociopolitical or religious viewpoint a would-be ‘book banner’ represents, there is a whole other group of ‘banners’ out there who would purge and hide information that that person holds dear and that, if there aren’t people arguing against censorship, it truly is a predictable slippery slope and a downward spiral of challenge and counter-challenge by opposing factions in a divided society,” Eschete said. The ALA recommends those who want to fight censorship in their local community use their voice to speak out against book bans at local library board meetings and on social media and to vote in the upcoming elections at all levels of government for candidates who defend the right to free speech. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of IES Abroad ARTS UW-Madison student wins grand prize at Study Abroad Film Festival Q&A with Sami Stidham on her short film, “Take The Goggles Off.” By Spencer Ball November 30, 2023 | 5:00am CST “They say that studying abroad changes you,” a voiceover begins in a University of Wisconsin-Madison student’s award-winning short film. “But what I did not expect to learn or realize is that I had been living but only half alive.” “Take The Goggles Off” is a short film by Sami Stidham, a senior at UW-Madison studying journalism and digital studies. The film centers around her semester abroad in Barcelona in the spring of 2023. Stidham traveled to Barcelona through IES Abroad, a leading nonprofit study abroad provider based in Chicago, IL. She was one of 13 semifinalists in this year's 9th Annual IES Abroad Study Abroad Film Festival. “Take The Goggles Off” won first place, earning Stidham the $1,500 Grand Prize as well as claiming the new $5,000 IES Abroad Barbara Bobrich Annual Scholarship for a future UW-Madison study abroad student in financial need. Stidham chronicles her explorations in rhythmic prose and striking imagery, and she expresses how living in a new world pushed her to appreciate beauty in the everyday. She encourages her audience not to become mindless in repeating the habitual and mundane. The compassionate and life-affirming film finds meaning and awe in little details and small moments. Courtesy of IES Abroad This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. How did you decide to make your film? I was studying in Barcelona through IES Abroad, and I found out a month-ish into my semester that they hosted a film festival competition every year. I'm getting a Digital Studies Certificate and, through that, I've gotten really into film and have fallen in love with it. I knew I wanted to find something to do a film on for the festival. How new was this filmmaking process for you? Was there anything that was harder than you were expecting? Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email I’ve done a fair amount of filmmaking for my classes, but nothing huge. Everything has been really short mini-documentaries, video stories and other one-minute projects, both for digital studies and for my journalism classes as well. My short film is actually the longest thing I've ever made. Writing the script was a little difficult because I wanted it all to rhyme. And then I also wanted to communicate specific things and include specific memories, and I had footage I really wanted to include. So that was difficult, to get it all to sound the way I wanted to sound while at the same time communicating the message I wanted to convey. Then, editing just took forever, because editing always does. But I really enjoy this stuff, so it was fun to do. I was really struck by the shot selection you chose to accompany the voiceover, and how that combination added to the message of the film. Did you plan to take those shots ahead of time, or was it a matter of looking through footage afterward and finding what fit? Both. There were a couple of shots or memories I recorded that I really wanted to include. And then there were other things where I didn't have planned out footage I wanted. A lot of it was just writing the script and then finding footage I thought fit. How did it feel to finally present your film at the festival? I am proud of it. There are always things that I would change about it, but I feel like that's always true for creative works. It's a message I really believe in, so I was really excited to have other people see it. But creative works are so subjective. It was nerve-wracking to have that be put out there. I got over that a little bit by the time the actual festival rolled around. I had to be a politician and ask all of my friends and family to go watch it and vote for it, so I got over a little bit of that like, “oh, go watch my short film.” I was really excited to have it out there, but definitely a little nervous to find out if I won as well. Courtesy of IES Abroad Were there any big elements that didn’t end up making the final cut? I went to London with a friend from Madison for a weekend, and on the flight back I ended up talking to the woman next to me. She was from Bulgaria and lived in Spain. I’m a camp counselor in the summer, and I had a little friendship bracelet — it was red, white and pink — on my water bottle. And this woman was like “Oh my gosh, is this from Martenitsa?” Martenitsa is a Bulgarian tradition where they make hair ties, bracelets and necklaces from red and white string twisted together. It’s something with spring renewal, and you wear it until you see your first sparrow or your first tree blooming. Then, you tie it to a tree, and it’s supposed to bring good luck and good fortune. I thought that was a really cool, unique experience. Then, a week later back in Spain, I was walking home from class. Right outside my host mom's apartment there were a bunch of trees with red and white string tied to them. I really wanted to include something about that, but it was hard to fit it in. And I could not figure out how to rhyme the word Martenitsa. So that ended up not getting in, but I still included the footage without the story. What were some of the lessons that you took away from the experience? I learned through my journalism classes that I don't want to be a traditional reporter. There are a lot of things that I would not jive with even in broadcast or film journalism. I just don't like having a new thing every day and having to do something more surface-level. The longest piece of one thing on broadcast news is two or three minutes. I really enjoy having one topic and getting a lot of time to really dive into it. That's why I want to go into documentaries and longer-form journalism. This experience has definitely been really helpful for that endeavor, I mean, the reception of it was really good. It seemed like a lot of people connected to it and liked it, which I was very honored by. More than anything, it's just given me some confidence. I'm graduating in the spring, and I'm going to have to figure out what to do with my life really soon. It's definitely helped me realize I'm on the right path, career-wise. Are there any documentary topics that you're really interested in or something you might want to explore in the future? You can probably tell from my film, but I love travel, and I love nature. I grew up camping and road tripping, and my parents are both pretty hippie-dippie. As a result, I feel a really strong connection to nature. Obviously, the environment and the climate are facing quite a bit of hardship right now, with climate change and all this stuff going on. So I am really interested in going into documentaries about the environment and what we can do to help. Finally, what’s your favorite memory from your semester abroad? I went to Italy for spring break with a group of friends, and we were in Rome for a couple days. We all toured the Colosseum, but I went on a different day because I booked my tickets too late. I ended up going alone to this tour of the Colosseum, and I met this older married couple on the tour. They were some of the most genuine and kind people I've ever met. And they had three kids of their own who are all grown up. We got to talking, and they seemed really interested in my life. I think they just noticed, “Here's this young girl, doing this thing on her own.” They almost became my adopted parents for the tour. I had a lot of experiences abroad where I was so astounded by the kindness and generosity of strangers. They were so sweet, they would always make sure that I had a spot at the front of the group so I could hear our tour guide better. They made sure I had water because it was hot and took pictures of me because my friends weren't with me. Then, at the end of the tour, they had this really sweet parental heart-to-heart with me, where they essentially were just like, “You have to go after the things that you want in life. Like if you want to live abroad, it's scary, but you just got to do it. You got to take that leap of faith, and your family and support system will always be there to back you up if things go wrong.” It was a really unique experience. And that literally will stay with me forever. “Take The Goggles Off” is available on YouTube. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Drew Wesson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison cut the ribbon on BRT, but is it all it’s cracked up to be? Madison Metro’s BRT system offers riders a new and improved experience, but some students say it just is not good enough. By Jake Piper October 16, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The city of Madison launched their new bus rapid transit (BRT) system on Sep. 24, offering riders a new and improved rapid route and 62 new, fully electric bendy buses deployed across all routes to reduce wait times and delays. While some riders are pleased with the new bus system, others say the new buses are flashy and don’t offer meaningful improvements over last year’s revised routes. Madison Metro Transit released a statement on Friday warning BRT users of potential service outages until the end of the month, with routes B, 28 and 38 being the primarily impacted lines. This outage comes after District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan characterized the rollout of BRT as having “a lot of kinks.” However, Govindarajan is certain that given time, Metro will be able to work out delays in the BRT system. “It’s not a one night change,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal. Even though the $351 million price tag seems costly, Govindarajan said the city has only paid for 6% of the figure out of pocket, with the other 94% being covered by funding from the state and federal government. “This really hasn’t impacted the city a whole lot financially,” Govindarajan said. “When you look at what Metro used to cost in 2014, we have actually continued to fund Metro at pretty much the same levels accounting for inflation.” Govindarajan also said the BRT initiative significantly improved bus routes since last year, removing an excess of numbered lines and creating the new letter line routes. “Before BRT, if you wanted to get from downtown campus to West Towne Mall, you would have to get on bus 2 or bus 7 and then go to the West Transfer Point,” Govindarajan said. “The whole thing would take 45 to 50 minutes. Now with BRT, you can get there in 25 minutes.” In addition to more direct routes, the BRT system implemented red bus only lanes and dedicated bus stop lights, which Govindarajan said allows buses to get through stop lights and areas of high congestion faster than traditional cars. Still, students remain cautious about the new bus lines. Since coming to campus, University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Reesa Karamanski told the Cardinal the buses are “always late,” and she is “never been able to accurately tell when they’ll arrive.” Brooke Manteufel, a sophomore at UW-Madison, said the new system has been “overall pretty positive,” but the buses don’t seem much more reliable than last year. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email New bus pass system causes confusion, frustration among students Govindarajan and the students all agreed the new system for picking up a bus pass this year was difficult. Before this fall, student bus passes were given out by the Associated Students of Madison (ASM), but with the advent of the new BRT bus lines, Metro Madison gave responsibility to UW Transportation Services instead. Govindarajan said this change made him “a little upset” to see the “loss of power” normally afforded to ASM. Students too were upset at the change from past years. Elias Cassis, a senior at UW-Madison, bluntly said the new system for picking up bus passes was “confusing and sucked ass.” His biggest complaints were the lack of warning and clarity from the university about the new system and the confusing nature of signing up online for a bus pass. In the past, he said all he had to do “was come down to Union South and swipe my student ID.” Manteufel agreed the process for applying for a bus pass was “annoying.” She said she struggled to find what website bus passes could be found on and when she did it was “unclear” which bus pass she was supposed to get. Govindarajan acknowledged his and other students' frustrations with the new bus pass system, but reassured students that come next semester, just like the BRT lines, the process would be much more streamlined. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Courtesy of A24 ARTS Zac Efron strikes his iron claw into viewers’ hearts Inspired by the famous Von Erich wrestling clan, “The Iron Claw” balances high-action fight scenes with sob-worthy moments. By Bryna Goeking February 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST I wasn’t expecting a movie packed with sweaty muscular dudes, 1980s rock music and teenage heart-throbs inspired by a Texan wrestling family to make me sob so hard I couldn’t stop coughing. But “The Iron Claw” is more than just a battle of wrestlers. It’s a battle of toxic masculinity and generational trauma among family members, stuff you can’t beat by physical force alone. In a story known all too well, the movie follows the lives of brothers falling apart under pressure to be the toughest and the strongest. Zac Efron, who stands out as Kevin Von Erich, watches three of his brothers meet their end, all in one way or another related to torment and abuse from their father. Kevin Von Erich was always told his family was cursed, a myth that felt all too real following the death of his older brother at five years old. His father, Fritz Von Erich, taught him and his brothers the only way to survive the curse was to be “the toughest, the strongest.” For the Von Erich brothers, failure in wrestling was a manifestation of failure in manhood. The brothers struggled to talk about their feelings or seek help for extreme stress. Their family encapsulates toxic masculinity, modeled by their father. The brothers all struggle with some form of depression, chronic stress and substance abuse as a result. David Von Erich is perhaps the most pertinent example of the risks of toxic masculinity. His death occurs the night before the heavyweight championship, the most important fight of his career. In the movie and in real life, he died from acute enteritis, an easily treatable condition he ignored to continue wrestling. “The Iron Claw” breathes new life into the story of the Von Erich family and provides a fresh perspective on how ideas of gender and masculinity have changed since the late 20th century. It reminds viewers of the importance of men’s mental health and that being physically strong is nothing without strong mental health. In recent years, male athletes have begun speaking out about their struggles with mental health — a cultural code that suggests a growing openness toward these issues. From Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson to Michael Phelps to Dak Prescott, male athletes are pushing back against the narrative that they must always be the strongest to be the best. “The Iron Claw” is perhaps the only movie this year that can transition flawlessly from intense, high-action wrestling to grave funerals. The aggression of wrestling is seamlessly interwoven with tense, emotional moments against Fritz. The film is cast to perfection, with Efron delivering a career-defining performance. Jeremy Allen White, Harris Dickinson and Stanley Simons bring distinct energies to each of the brothers that viewers can understand with little exposition. Lily James, who plays Kevin’s wife, shines as the emotional heart of the film, often functioning as the only character with any level of emotional intelligence. In the penultimate scene, the deceased brothers reunite in a peaceful afterlife. Away from the torment of their father and the grueling expectations of toxic masculinity, the end result of happiness is cathartic after seeing the characters struggle for so long. Watching Efron as Kevin Von Erich in the final scene finally break and allow himself to cry and feel the misery of the past two hours inspires a sense of hope — maybe he can rise above the curse of his father. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Von Erichs may be remembered as a powerhouse wrestling family, but “The Iron Claw” will be remembered for its artful dismantling of toxic masculinity. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of Sue Jennik CITY NEWS Q&A: League of Women Voters president talks state constitutional amendment change, top concerns for women in upcoming election Sue Jennik, president of the League of Women Voters of Dane County, discussed top concerns for women voters and what a proposed state constitutional amendment change could mean for Wisconsin women. By Kayla Northway October 23, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The League of Women Voters is a nonpartisan grassroots organization working to protect and expand voting rights. Dane County’s League of Women Voters is one of 21 leagues in Wisconsin with over 500 members and is headed by president Sue Jennik. Jennik grew up in Milwaukee before moving to New York City, where she worked for 40 years as an attorney representing unions before moving back to Wisconsin. Since July, she’s served as president of Dane County’s League of Women Voters, and prior to that she served as the program director for the League’s educational arm. Jennik told The Daily Cardinal she is passionate about the League because it focuses on voter rights and issues that are important to the public. On the Nov. 5th ballot, a constitutional amendment would forbid city governments from allowing non-citizens to vote in local elections. Jennik sat down with the Cardinal to explain how this amendment could impact Wisconsin residents and what the League of Women Voters is doing to inform voters of this change. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. What does the amendment entail, and why may it have a disproportionate impact on women’s voting rights? The constitutional amendment on the ballot that would change the current constitution, which says “every” citizen may vote to the limitation that “only” a citizen may vote. The concern is that that will lead to requirements that voters now have to produce documentation and proof that they are a citizen. For women, this is especially onerous because women have a birth certificate showing that they were born in this country, and then often they change their names when they get married, or they get divorced and they may get remarried. All of that documentation would have to be provided, and it may be difficult for women to produce all of them. I talked to one woman who said she would never be able to get sufficient documentation because she doesn't have her birth certificate. She has tried repeatedly to get an accurate birth certificate, and for whatever reason hasn't been able to do that, so she wouldn't be able to produce the documentation needed. It wouldn't affect non-citizens because they don't vote anyway. It would affect citizens who are not able to produce sufficient documentation to prove their citizenship. In general, this would be people who are native-born citizens who aren't able to get the documentation that they would need to show that they're entitled to vote, which could be as many as 30,000 citizens who would be denied the right to vote in Wisconsin. What was the process to pass the amendment, and why do you think they decided to pass the amendment now? In order to get a proposed amendment on the ballot, it can only be done by the state Legislature — it can't be done by a citizen petition. Unlike some other states, only the state Legislature can do it, and it has to pass two consecutive sessions of the legislature. Legislative sessions are two years long, so in 2023 they passed a proposed amendment, this one and several others. In 2024 they announced they passed it for the second time, so they announced that it would be on the ballot. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email There's an unfair perception that non-citizens, people who are not citizens, who work here, pay taxes and their kids may go to school, shouldn't be involved at all in our political life, and some localities think that they should have a say on those things. The other fear is that this would unfairly impact people of color, especially those who are perceived to be Hispanic or coming from Mexico or another South American country. It goes along with this idea that somehow immigrants are taking over. There's this anti-immigrant feeling, which, in Wisconsin, is not our tradition. There have always been migrant farm workers working in Wisconsin. Immigrants are needed to work on farms, particularly in the dairy industry where the estimate is that 75% of the workers are immigrants. Many of the people who have those farms or live in areas near those farms don't support the idea that there's a problem with having immigrants because they are an important part of the economy. They're also important in the hospitality, construction and landscaping industries, and with the low employment in Wisconsin, there really is not a danger that people are taking over jobs that others might do. The fact is, we need more workers here. What are the top concerns you’ve heard from women voters in this election, and how will these concerns affect women voters’ turnout in this election? A very big concern, of course, is reproductive rights, including abortion, access to birth control, access to IVF or anything that women need to protect their health care. Basically, women can't get the health care they need to save their lives and protect their health. Women should be able to make their own decisions about their bodies along with their doctor's advice. Another big issue that people don't talk about very much are wages. Wages are higher than they were, but in Wisconsin and federally, the minimum wage is still $7.25. The state could raise it or the federal government could raise it, but they haven't done that. Even though a lot of people get paid more than that, there's no requirement that they get paid more than that, and a lot of people are trying to survive on those minimum wage jobs, and it's very difficult to do. Do you think women in Dane County will be more motivated in this election than prior elections? The issue of reproductive rights is new for a presidential year because we didn't face that in 2020, and I think it motivates a lot of women to pay attention to the election more than they did in the past. In Dane County, there is a lot of interest in this election, and the turnout will be high. We even had the highest turnout in the state in the August election, which was 45%. I think traditionally, in the last several presidential elections, the Dane County turnout has been 80% or higher, so people are definitely motivated to vote. The League of Women Voters of Dane County does voter registration events all over the county. We've had over 100 events since the beginning of September, and a lot of them were at the DMV offices. The DMV offices have voter registration kiosks, and we have volunteers there who assist people and make sure they're registered and get them registered, or update their registration if they’ve moved –– all that kind of stuff. We have registered or helped register 1,300 people in the last couple of months and that's up from prior years, so there definitely is interest in voting. What actions are the League of Women Voters and other organizations around the state taking to raise awareness among women voters about the potential consequences of this amendment and ensuring women’s voices are heard in the face of such challenges? We have flyers about the amendment every time we do an event, every time we do any tabling, which we also do at the farmers’ markets and at community events, and we were also at the Black Women's Wellness Foundation meeting. We're always including information about that amendment at our tabling, and we do a lot of social media about that and other issues. Actually, one of the most popular of our postings is our information about the amendment, because people aren't seeing it very much otherwise. In addition to general tabling, we also have candidates' answers both online and in print, and we're distributing those now. Generally this is for local offices, and we ask them certain questions, and whatever they say, we publish their answers. It's a way to educate voters about who the candidates are and what they stand for. We also held a forum in September on the referenda that are on the ballot for the school board increases that are being sought. We educate people about why it's being proposed and why people think it's important or oppose it. We also work with a lot of different organizations. We're a central part of the voter ID coalition, a group of about at least 10 or 15 organizations, including, most prominently the NAACP. We also do work with people who are working with immigrants who want to become citizens. We've had an immigrant town hall so that when people are either preparing to become citizens or at the event right when they are sworn in as citizens, we have a table there so that they can immediately register to vote. So we work with organizations that do that, like the Literacy Network and Central Hispanic To Go. Does the League of Women Voters of Dane County participate in advocacy work outside of the election? Yes, we do. The league has long taken positions on issues and on the way that's been done. One of the impressive things about the work of the league is that before any position is taken, there's a study by a group of members. Over the years, groups of members would get together and study an issue in detail, and then it would be debated in the organization. It would normally start at the local level and then go to the state, and then it might be moved up to the national organization as well, so there's positions on many, many, many issues. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Badgers compete with, come up short against another Big Ten contender Wisconsin faced another tough competitor in the Nebraska Cornhuskers, going 1-2 with only three regular season opponents remaining. By Justin Alpert April 25, 2023 | 11:38am CDT Wisconsin Softball (23-16, 8-7) lost two of three versus Nebraska (32-14, 12-5) last weekend in Lincoln. A week after dropping all three to conference-leading Northwestern, Wisconsin now faced the Big Ten’s second best team. The Badgers managed just one win. That said, they were within a run in both losses and once again proved that, with competent defense and better production with runners in scoring position, they could make some noise in the postseason. Friday | 7-6 L Defense, a glaring weakness in Wisconsin’s 2023 performance, has never hurt the Badgers more than it did Friday. Starter Maddie Schwartz (L, 8-10), who threw 145 pitches over 9.2 innings in the 3.5-hour affair, stomached seven earned runs thanks to five Badger errors. Wisconsin trailed 4-0 early before totaling five runs in the third and fourth innings. Catcher Christaana Angelopulos gave the Badgers a 6-5 lead in the eighth inning with an RBI walk. Yet Nebraska responded in the bottom of the inning, tying the game on a passed ball — Cornhusker Abbie Squier had singled and reached third on an error by right fielder Ava Kuszak. Squier reached third base in the 10th inning thanks to an Angelopulos error. An RBI single brought her home as the winning run. Nebraska pitcher Courtney Wallace (W, 20-8) was highly inefficient, finishing with 199 pitches in 10 innings. The conference leader in walks (89) issued eight free passes, hit a pair of batters and yielded nine hits. Wisconsin failed to capitalize on Wallace’s wildness, stealing zero bases and stranding seven runners in scoring position. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Saturday | 4-3 W Paytn Monticelli (W, 6-2) delivered her best outing thus far versus a Big Ten opponent, albeit with an uncharacteristic statline. The freshman allowed three runs (two earned) and walked a pair in six innings with no strikeouts. Monticelli dominated high school and the early part of this season by missing bats, but she can clearly be effective without racking up strikeouts. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Katie Keller doubled home a run to tie it 1-1 in the fifth inning. Nebraska then responded in the bottom of the inning, taking the lead on Brooke Andrews’ two-run triple. Facing a 3-1 deficit in the top of the seventh and at risk of suffering a sixth straight loss, Wisconsin ambushed starter Sarah Harness with three consecutive hits to begin the inning. The third, a Keller single, drove in two and tied the game. Kayla Konwent followed with a go-ahead RBI groundout. Predictably, coach Yvette Healy turned to Schwartz to protect the one-run lead. Unfazed as ever, Schwartz needed just 10 pitches to complete a perfect seventh inning and earn her third save of 2023. Sunday | 2-1 L Skylar Sirdashney’s conference-leading 14th error put a runner in scoring position to lead off the second inning. Schwartz (L, 8-11), making her third appearance in as many games, retired the next two batters before allowing a walk and a two-run double. Both runs were unearned, much like the seven on Schwartz’s line from Friday. Molly Schlosser pulled an RBI single in the third to make it 2-1, but Wisconsin never scored again. That wasn’t for a lack of opportunities, though, as the Badgers left six runners in scoring position in the series finale. Nebraska’s Wallace (W, 21-8) threw another 145 pitches and walked another five batters. Once again, Wisconsin failed to make Wallace pay for her control issues. Walking, not running The Badgers drew 18 walks, tallied 23 hits and struck out only 12 times in the three-game series. While Nebraska is a formidable opponent, Wisconsin must convert all those baserunners into far more than 11 runs. A lack of speed continues to hurt the Badgers, who have totaled three stolen bases over their last six games. Opposing pitchers will be more inclined to attack the zone if Wisconsin can find a way to steal more bags and push more runners into scoring position. By her lofty standards, Konwent had a fairly quiet weekend with just a pair of singles. She did draw four walks and drive in a pair of runs, but Wisconsin’s lineup isn’t nearly as threatening when Konwent, the program’s all-time home runs leader, isn’t lifting the ball and slugging. Still, her 1.207 OPS ranks fourth in the conference and her .531 OBP ranks third. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Freshman second baseman Rylie Crane has cooled off following her early-season hot streak. Her average has dropped from .300 to .250 over the last 11 games, a span during which she’s failed to tally an extra-base hit and has drawn only two walks. Crane stole a base this weekend and her four steals are tied for second-most on the roster — she could be a candidate to run more in the last few couple weeks of the season. The massive innings load and refusal to yield earned runs have lowered Schwartz’s ERA to a sparkling 1.47. In the Big Ten, only Penn State’s Bailey Parshall boasts a better ERA (1.34). Schwartz has remarkably allowed only two runs in her last 55 innings of work, yet Wisconsin has gone 5-6 in those games. The season is nearly three months old and the Badgers still can’t solve their defensive woes, which continue to overshadow Schwartz’s dominance. Going 1-5 against Northwestern and Nebraska put Wisconsin in a tough spot, as the Badgers are now in seventh place in the Big Ten with just eight games remaining. Silver linings aside, close losses won’t cut it going forward if Wisconsin wants a favorable seed in the Big Ten Tournament. The Badgers host Minnesota (28-16, 9-6) for a Tuesday doubleheader before heading east for a three-game set at Maryland (31-15, 7-10). Add the regular-season finale versus Iowa (28-20, 8-9) into the equation, and Wisconsin has eight winnable games ahead. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Jason Nolen and one of his three cats, Bean, who is a year old, playing together on Oct. 12, 2024. Photo by Ella Hanley | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison’s cat whisperer: The professor behind a purr-fect Instagram Jason Nolen, a sociology and criminology professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, has spent the past eight years curating a cat community among Madison residents. By Ella Hanley November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST Jason Nolen is known primarily as a sociology and criminology professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, but his living room tells a different story. Its walls are covered in cat-themed artwork, a testament to his more than eight years as a dedicated cat enthusiast. Beyond his work at UW-Madison, Nolen runs @cats_of_madison, an Instagram account showcasing different feline residents of Madison. He told The Daily Cardinal the account was created in 2016 on a whim after he posted photos of a neighborhood cat to his personal account and noticed there was no account dedicated to Madison’s cats. Now, the account has amassed more than 27,000 followers and features daily posts of cats that Nolen has personally come across on porches, at shelters and in people’s homes. “After it became popular, I was like, okay, the pressure's on,” Nolen said. “Then I was like, ‘Wait, where am I going to find cats to take pictures of?’ I started thinking about it, really looking for cats and I realized they’re just everywhere. Porch cats are everywhere. I kind of trained my eye to spot them.” Nolen began going on "catwalks," walking around certain neighborhoods with a high likelihood of running into a lounging porch cat. Neighborhoods east of the isthmus like Monroe Street, Marquette and Williamson Street are the “cat hot spots,” he said. As the account gained popularity, Nolen began receiving requests to photograph cats in people’s homes, which he does often and always for free. “There’s so many cats I know now that also know me and cats who are generally afraid of people that I’ve built a rapport with,” Nolen said. “They’ll come say hi, and that means a lot.” Nolen said he’d never considered himself to be good at photography. But over the years, through practice, he’s gotten better at understanding the best angles and how to get photos that really “demonstrate a cat’s personality.” "I feel like if I wanted to find a different career, I could become a cat behaviorist,” he said. “I've learned so many things, like how to behave, move or act in relation to what a cat is doing and I’ve become good at it. I've had to become good at it, so that cats will trust me and come up to me and interact with me." Nolen also said he keeps a “backlog” of photos, which will be used as content through the winter once the porch cats are back inside. Madisonians feel paw-sitive about community cat bonding Over the years, Nolen has formed partnerships with local cat shelters, including the Madison Cat Project. The shelter holds cat adoption fairs every other Saturday, and Nolen typically visits a few days beforehand to take photos of the adoptable cats ahead of the event. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Nolen said shelter workers have told him they often hear people visiting the adoption fairs to meet a cat they’d seen on Cats of Madison. He also gets direct messages from followers, which he loves. “People tell me my account is the best part of their day,’” Nolen said. “When people say things like that, it almost makes me want to start crying. I feel so happy.” Additionally, Nolen has facilitated reunions of people and their lost cats, and when a beloved neighborhood cat passes away, the community grieves together. “When I find out a cat I’ve posted about has passed, I always make sure to honor them. If it’s a cat I've posted a photo of before, I’ll share all the posts I did about them in my stories, along with their name and flowers on either side,” said Nolen. “I don’t say ‘RIP,’ but the flowers show that they’ve passed. Cats of Madison becomes this kind of community space for shared grief, which means a lot to me.” Cats on campus Nolen became a lecturer at UW-Madison in fall 2022 and has taught sociology, ethnicity and criminology classes. Next semester, he will teach Sociology of Companion Animals at UW-Madison, a course he will create based on his “field experience” with pets. “In my criminology class, though, I’ve shown pictures and videos of my cats. I’ve told students — I've done this in past semesters too — to send me pictures of their pets and tell me a little about them,” Nolen said. “Then, at the start of lecture, I’ll take the first minute to say, ‘Here’s so-and-so’s pet,’ and I’ll share interesting stuff about them. Students really seem to like that.” However, he never tells his students about his Instagram accounts, including @dogs.of.madison, and generally waits until a student realizes that it’s him to say something. “The best part about all this for me is that I've made so many cat friends,” Nolen said. “And I know that it's maybe a little bizarre, but it's become an important part of my social life. And that's really meaningful to me, because I really love cats." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
A shelf of books at College Library on October 19, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Nicholas Duda | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘An affront to individual conscience and curiosity’: Librarian speaks out against book banning’s effects in Wisconsin A Wisconsin librarian told The Daily Cardinal banning books can suppress the voices of marginalized communities and curtail freedom of expression. By Joseph Panzer October 24, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Oshkosh Public Library director Darryl Eschete has dealt with calls for censorship of public libraries for years as a librarian in Louisiana, Iowa and now in Wisconsin. He is wary of the rising challenges to literature and its effect on individual liberty and the right to information. A quarter of Wisconsin school districts have received challenges to a combined total of 1,617 books since 2020, with 667 books being removed or age restricted. “‘Banning’ — forbidding the public from being able to find information or works of expression — is the easy question for me: it’s unacceptable,” Eschete told The Daily Cardinal. “It’s the worst kind of social control and shows a great lack of faith in people being able to discern what kinds of information is worthy of consideration or that they need in their lives.” Calls to ban books have found a foothold in the Wisconsin Legislature through bills such as AB 309, which would have banned the use of school funds for the purchase of “obscene” material, according to a report from PEN America. Book bans violate the First Amendment and make children less likely to become informed voters as adults, according to the ACLU of Wisconsin. Although libraries in Oshkosh have relatively low pressure to remove books, Eschete is on guard about what these bans mean for the accessibility of knowledge in public libraries. “I think the outright banning or removal of any information by governmental forces, however powerless otherwise, (like a library board), is an affront to individual conscience and curiosity,” he said. Eschete also believes challenging books “breeds both paranoia and contempt” of others in a way that is not conducive to good political discourse. “The only contact I’ve had from anyone who wanted to see anything removed or restricted came early last spring from a local policy maker who met with me to express that she thought some of the material we had in the children’s area was inappropriate,” Eschete said. “We met and discussed it openly, and the matter blew over.” The National Women’s Law Center posits that challenges to books with LGBTQ+, feminist or racial themes silences the voices of marginalized communities in literature and sends a message that these identities are not wanted. Books act as tools for children to reflect on their lives, peer into the lives of others and develop empathy, according to the Mirrors, Windows and Sliding Glass Doors metaphor by children’s literature expert Rudine Sims Bishop. Exposure to unfamiliar viewpoints can help develop children into more informed future voters by making them aware of the struggles of others, the ACLU of Wisconsin argued. The American Library Association found that the majority of the most frequently challenged books in 2022 were targeted for LGBTQ+ content and alleged sexually explicit material (“Gender Queer” by Maia Kobabe) with other issues including race relations (Toni Morrison’s “The Bluest Eye) and drug use (Ellen Hopkins’ “Crank”). Eschete views this as censorship that opposes liberty and intellectual progress. Over half of American adults, regardless of party affiliation, oppose book banning in schools in spite of vocal efforts by prominent right-wing politicians and advocacy groups to pull books from shelves, according to a poll conducted by NPR. Book challengers often use information from larger national groups when deciding what books to target, according to Wisconsin Watch. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One leading organization is Moms for Liberty, which the Southern Poverty Law Center classifies as an extremist group. In their 111-page document on what books they challenge, the group singles out allegedly “vulgar” quotes from books found in high schools written predominantly by LGBTQ+ people, people of color and women to argue why they should be pulled from shelves. Despite the current nature of book challenges, Eschete’s ultimate warning to prospective censors is that this can eventually become a double-edged sword. “One tactic I’ve used in my career is explaining — truthfully — to someone upset about a book that no matter what ideological or sociopolitical or religious viewpoint a would-be ‘book banner’ represents, there is a whole other group of ‘banners’ out there who would purge and hide information that that person holds dear and that, if there aren’t people arguing against censorship, it truly is a predictable slippery slope and a downward spiral of challenge and counter-challenge by opposing factions in a divided society,” Eschete said. The ALA recommends those who want to fight censorship in their local community use their voice to speak out against book bans at local library board meetings and on social media and to vote in the upcoming elections at all levels of government for candidates who defend the right to free speech. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Little, simple and meaningful acts of kindness can impact a person more than you know. Photo by Kalli Anderson | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Self-care mantras have corrupted basic kindness. Just hold the door Modern interpretations of self-care mantras like this have become social cheat codes for our own bad behavior. By Blake Martin November 14, 2024 | 3:00am CST I owe you something, and you owe me something, too. I have no idea who you are, and you’ve probably never met me before — but that’s the point. Think about it: when you walk into a campus building, and you know a stranger is just a few seconds behind you, do you stay and hold the door? Does it change if you’re having a bad day? More importantly, do you owe that act of kindness to the person behind you? Today, the idea that “you don’t owe anyone, anything” thrives in primarily digital self-care spaces. For the most part, it comes from a good place. When we’ve had a long day, or we just aren’t feeling our best, it’s important to focus on treating ourselves with kindness. Maybe, when we’re feeling overwhelmed, or lost in our own thoughts, it’s okay that we let the door close on a stranger. But the first time I read the words “you don’t owe anyone, anything,” while scrolling through self-care content on TikTok, I couldn't stop thinking about it for a week. In the days that followed, I started to see this rhetoric in practice everywhere I looked. Modern interpretations of self-care mantras like this have become social cheat codes for our own bad behavior. In pursuit of self-care, we have convinced ourselves that lapses in kindness are a means of putting the self first. From excuses made about doors closed in strangers' faces to glares exchanged for smiles on the street, it’s become clear that in an attempt to care for ourselves, we’ve lost sight of our duty to care for others. But where did the idea that we “don’t owe anyone, anything” come from? Looking back to 1966, we find the first notable use of the phrase in Harry Browne’s “A Gift for My Daughter,” in which he claims the best Christmas gift he could give was the “simple truth” that “no one owes you anything.” However, Browne, a two-time Libertarian Party presidential nominee, wasn’t speaking from a place of personal leniency and self-care, but instead arguing in favor of hyper-individualism and self-reliance. So how did the rhetoric of a libertarian politician become a mantra for modern self-care? Over time, the self-care movement has become rather unrecognizable. The origins of the self-care movement were inherently political, getting its start in the 1960s as a form of radical self-preservation adopted by Black civil rights activists. Foundational writers and thinkers like Audrey Lorde and bell hooks focused on self-care as a means of survival and a method of community care. Now, instead of serving as a means of political resistance, the landscape of modern self-care has become dominated by consumerism and the same hyper-individualism Browne spoke about. From bubble baths to face masks peddled by influencers, quick-fix self-care solutions have become a perpetual carrot on a stick designed to keep us, above all, in constant pursuit of our own wellness. But it’s important to ask ourselves — is this really self-care? Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email In the words of bell hooks, “whether we learn how to love ourselves and others will depend on the presence of a loving environment. Self love cannot flourish in isolation.” We all owe each other something: a conscious effort to uphold the right to exist in a community of care. While it might be tempting to focus on ourselves, and ourselves alone, we can’t ignore that our own wellbeing often relies on those around us. Next time you get the chance, you owe it to yourself, and to the stranger behind you, just hold the door. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Blake MartinBlake Martin is the opinions editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Constrained by state law, Wisconsin cities struggle to raise enough money From limits on property tax increases to a near-statewide ban on local sales taxes, municipalities in Wisconsin have few options to bring in more revenue as service costs rise. By Joseph Panzer October 24, 2024 | 3:00am CDT As inflation has driven up the cost of services, Wisconsin’s local governments, including the city of Madison, find themselves constrained by state laws limiting how they can raise money. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal that current state budgets and tax laws dating back to former Gov. Scott Walker’s administration have made it harder for Madison to provide residents with essential services. “[City employees] haven’t always gotten the pay increases relative to inflation that they have deserved,” Govindarajan said. “The city has grown quite a lot since 2012, but we’re still at the same levels of service for trash collection, for example.” Despite these constraints, Govindarajan and other officials stressed that city leaders have not given up in their pursuit of increased benefits for Madison residents. GOP-controlled Legislature strikes down budgetary proposals Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway held a press conference Oct. 3 at the Madison Public Library with state lawmakers to demand greater funding for Dane County cities. Gov. Tony Evers’ 2023-25 budget proposal included a shared revenue distribution that would make the state give to municipalities a minimum of 95% of what they gave the previous year. Additionally, the proposal included a 5% increase in state payments for municipal services like police, waste disposal and utilities and a 4% increase in general transportation aids for both counties and municipalities. But the biennial budget passed by the Legislature did not include these increases in funding for shared revenue, leaving Dane County cities underfunded. This is a result of 2023 Act 12, which initially intended to give all municipalities more funding but has created a disparity between Madison and the rest of the state. City Communications Manager Dylan Brogan told the Cardinal Act 12 has changed “very little” in what Madison can achieve through state funds despite the fact that Madison has added 90,000 residents since 2000 and is the fastest-growing city in the state. “That’s a lot more people paying state sales and income tax — a portion of which is supposed to help fund local governments,” Brogan said. “In 2024, Madison receives just $29 per resident through the shared revenue program. The average for Wisconsin cities is $195.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One particular impact of the shared revenue overhaul is that underfunded communities can begin to see cuts in the availability of important services, such as fire departments. Another impact of shared revenue decreasing is that it becomes harder for governments to hire public defenders and district attorneys at competitive salaries, according to Wisconsin Public Radio. This leads to a growing number of backlogged cases accumulating in the court system. Evers had previously pushed for a raise for public defenders and assistant DAs in his budget proposal before Republicans cut it. Raising revenues in municipalities is often difficult Beyond shared revenue from the state, a large part of Madison’s budget is funded by levying taxes. An estimated 71% of the city’s annual revenue comes through property taxes. “How the state government expects local governments to fund themselves is through the property tax,” Govindarajan said. “If local municipalities want to raise their budget, they are basically forced to ask taxpayers to increase their own taxes in order to pay for city services.” Wisconsin used to rely heavily on income and property taxes as a part of its revenue stream until the election of Walker in 2010 signaled a shift to fiscal conservatism and tax cuts. The cuts amounted to a 4.4% per capita reduction and created negative externalities for cities. “Walker basically cut aid to local governments and then also their ability to raise revenue,” Brogan said. “You used to be able to raise property taxes based on inflation and net new construction. Well, he took off the inflation part.” The Legislature’s budget-writing committee’s May 2011 legislation on property tax levy limits changed the minimum levy increase for inflation from 3% to 0%, prohibiting municipalities from increasing their base levies by more than one percentage that exceeded the local government’s total value of all taxable property. While the introduction of levy limits was a response to a then-contemporary growth in municipal tax rates, the loss of these minimum limits on levies has led to low-growth municipalities being unable to keep pace with inflation, according to the Wisconsin Policy Forum, a nonpartisan policy research organization. Brogan underscored the city of Monona’s Nov. 5 referendum on instituting a one-time $3 million increase to its property tax levy as an example of a city struggling to keep up with costs. The 2024 Wisconsin Department of Revenue report found that Monona’s levy limit is only 0.45%. “How in the world are they going to be able to keep up with those costs when their ability to raise the property tax levy can never keep up?” Brogan said. “That’s something that hopefully the state Legislature is going to be addressing at some point, and that just is the tip of the iceberg of the revenue restrictions.” In his 2023-25 budget proposal, Evers suggested allowing municipalities greater privilege with selecting their own sales tax — known as the local option sales tax — giving Milwaukee County the ability to impose an additional 1% and other counties an additional 0.5% to their base. But the budget passed does not contain these measures. Rhodes-Conway named a local sales tax option as one of the items that would help Dane County communities secure the funds necessary to avoid cutting services during her Oct. 3 press conference. Partisan divides and next steps for cities When the biennial budget passed in 2023, Democrats unilaterally objected to it with no party members voting in support. One provision that Democrats took issue with was the institution of a tax cut when the state was in possession of a $7 billion budget surplus. “Republicans have been in charge of the Legislature for 14 years now,” Brogan told the Cardinal. “Gov. Evers has proposed budgets that treat cities like Madison a lot better, but the Republicans just ripped that up and passed their own budget.” To combat a budget shortfall, the Nov. 5 election in Madison will feature a $22 million funding referendum on the ballot to increase the city’s property tax levy above state levels. “We specifically came up with that number because that’s what it takes for us to continue our services,” Govindarajan said. “If the referendum passes, we’re not adding anything new. If we do not get that $22 million, we have to cut services.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball goes 2-3 at UMBC Spring Invite The Wisconsin Badgers softball team fought through their last tournament in Baltimore, going 2-3 for the series. By Abby Shulman March 18, 2024 | 12:29pm CDT After a pair of losses on Friday and a pair of wins on Saturday, the Badgers ended their final tournament with a close loss on Sunday. The Badgers started the UMBC Spring Invite in Baltimore on Friday with back-to-back, low-scoring losses against a duo of dog-themed teams — first against the University at Albany Great Danes, then to the UMBC Retrievers. For the first time this season, Wisconsin was shut out, losing 2-0 against Albany. The Great Danes scored in the third and seventh on RBIs and finished with a total of four hits compared to the Badgers’ three. Aside from a throwing error in the seventh, the Badgers battled on the defensive side, including pitcher Shelby Jacobson’s six strikeouts. The second game was closer, with UMBC stealing the 4-3 win in the sixth inning of the tough away matchup for Wisconsin. Like the last game, the scoring got going in the third, but the Badgers took the lead first this time, 1-0. Outfielder Eden Echevarria hit her first career home run with a line drive into deep center field. Resulting from a series of fielding errors, the Retrievers stole the lead back at 3-1 in the bottom of the fourth against pitcher Tessa Magnanimo, who still struck out seven throughout the game. In the following frame, Badgers infielder Fiona Giradot doubled and brought in two runs to tie the game. The Badgers faced an uphill battle after UMBC scored in the sixth, once again from a fielding error. The game ended at the top of the seventh after the Badgers again failed to score. Turning things around The Badgers started with a win against the Colgate Raiders on Saturday, beating them 5-3 after maintaining the lead the entire game. With ten total hits, the Badgers offense erupted in the first after infielder Ava Kuszak started off the game with a double. She made it home later in the inning to kick off the scoring at 1-0. The Badgers’ lead doubled to 2-0 after Catcher Emmy Wells, who went three-for-three at the plate, sent the pitch over the fence. In the top of the third, Wisconsin’s flawless defense ended with an error that allowed a Raiders’ baserunner to get home. The Badgers continued to dominate with the 2-1 score after starting pitcher Shelby Jacobson, who struck out seven this game, kept any more Raiders from scoring. In the fourth, the Badgers capitalized off Colgate’s errors after a hit from Echevarria brought in two runners, increasing the Badgers’ lead to 4-1. Wisconsin's last run of the game came from outfielder Peyton Bannon, who was brought in by Giradot. The Raiders loaded the bases in the seventh and scored two off of Jacobson but ended up falling to the Badgers 5-3. Afterward, Wisconsin came back to beat Albany in a low scoring 1-0 shutout, once again lacking offensive dominance on both teams’ parts similar to Friday’s game. The Badgers broke the tie in the fifth when Wells walked and pinch runner Danielle Lucey came in, reaching home on a throwing error from the Great Danes. Despite not scoring for the rest of the game, Magnanimo kept Albany off the bases on the defensive end, once again tying her count of seven strikeouts. Wisconsin won the shutout without a single hit from a Badger. Ending on a low Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin fought against the Retrievers in the second meeting of the weekend but fell short by two runs, losing 7-5 on Sunday’s game. A single off of Jacobson in the first led to an early pitching change, seeing Magnanimo enter the game — she also allowed a run in the same frame. The Badgers quickly retaliated by tying the game 2-2 in the second after Kuszak’s double brought Echevarria and catcher Emily Bojan home. Outfielder Brooke Kuffel’s single homerun in the top of the third stole the lead back 3-2 over the Retrievers. However, the rally went downhill when UMBC put up five in the bottom of the third. Between a wild pitch and a throwing error from Wisconsin, along with two home runs and five hits from UMBC, the inning ended 7-3. The Badgers persevered until the end. During the fifth, a score from Lucey and an RBI from Bojan — who went two-for-two on the day — brought the score to 7-5. Wisconsin kept fighting but could not score any more. With this being their last tournament of the season, the Badgers will face the University of Iowa on March 22-24 at Iowa’s Bob Pearl Field for a three-game away series to kick off the Big Ten season. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80
VOLLEYBALL Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State Badgers beat Spartans in four sets to finish third in the Big Ten Conference. By Carlos Bello December 7, 2024 | 9:57am CST No. 6 Wisconsin volleyball faced Michigan State at the Fieldhouse on Nov.30 to cap off the regular season and Big Ten play. With third place in the Big Ten already secured, the Badgers still played their starters on senior night, aiming to maintain a high NCAA tournament seed. The Spartans entered the match with a 6-13 Big Ten record and 13-18 overall. They failed to make the Big Ten tournament, so this matchup was their last of the season. Before the game, the Badgers honored seniors Sarah Franklin, Devyn Robinson, Anna Smrek, Julia Orzol, CC Crawford and Carly Anderson. In the first set, Wisconsin started with a 3-1 run, fueled by Spartan errors and a block from Franklin and Robinson. But Michigan State fought back, tying the game at 10-all with a 4-0 run. After head coach Kelly Sheffield issued a timeout, the Badgers responded with a 6-0 run, including two service aces from Crawford and two kills by Franklin. The Spartans narrowed the gap, but another 4-0 run by Wisconsin sealed the first set 25-19. The second set remained competitive, with neither team gaining a significant advantage. The Spartans held a 16-13 lead before the Badgers tied it on Crawford's kill. The teams continued to trade points, with momentum swinging back and forth. At the end of the set, the Badgers were down 23-22, but a 3-1 run gave them a 25-24 lead. The Spartans responded with their own run to take a two-point lead. Franklin answered with a kill, but two kills by Taylor Preston of the Spartans secured a 28-26 set two win for Michigan State. Wisconsin came out strong in the third set, building a 13-8 lead through two 3-0 runs. The Badgers maintained control, chaining points together while keeping Michigan State from going on any runs. The Spartans weren't done, though, as they fell behind 21-12 but went on a 5-0 run to get back in striking range. But, after a Sheffield timeout, the Badgers stopped the Spartans' momentum and won the set 25-19. Michigan State jumped to an early 5-2 lead in the fourth set. The Badgers responded with an 8-1 run featuring multiple kills from Franklin, an ace, block and kill from Orzol and multiple assists and a kill from freshman setter Charlie Fuerbringer. Wisconsin controlled the remainder of the set, chaining multiple points together and not allowing the Spartans to gain momentum. A kill from junior middle blocker Carter Booth sealed the set and match for the Badgers, 25-18. On senior night, the veterans shined. Franklin and Orzol led the team with 23 and 13 kills, respectively. Orzol, Crawford and Franklin each recorded multiple aces. Booth led all players with nine blocks, while Fuerbringer notched a season-high six. Saige Damrow continued her strong late-season play with a match-high 19 digs. The Badgers now turn their attention to the NCAA tournament, where they secured the No. 2 seed in the Lower Right Region. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Brooklyn Schwoerer, a sophomore at UW-Madison, and her Holstein cow Barracuda. Photo courtesy of Maddy Hensel/Dairy Agenda Today SCIENCE For the World Dairy Expo, cow health is key How dairy cattle nutrition and health impacts the lives of Wisconsin farmers and consumers. By Nicole Steele October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Brooklyn Schwoerer, a sophomore at the University of Wisconsin-Madison studying dairy science, lives on a 62-cow farm in Edgar, Wisconsin and is involved in all aspects of the dairy industry. Schoerer has been showing cows since she was three years old. This year, she got to show her black and white Holstein Barracuda at the annual World Dairy Expo in Madison. To celebrate dairy’s impact in Wisconsin, the World Dairy Expo brought all things dairy related to the Alliant Energy Center in a large four-day event from Oct. 1 to Oct. 4. With machinery, educational lectures and many exhibitioners showing their prized cows, the World Dairy Expo continues to showcase the large impact dairy brings to not just Wisconsin, but the world. Dairy farms are an integral part of Wisconsin’s economy, making a $46.5 billion economic impact each year and supporting over 100,000 jobs. With around 5,425 dairy herds, our state greatly depends on the cows as well as the farmers taking care of them. “Being able to interact and connect with all different kinds of people that share the same passion for dairy cattle as me is extremely rewarding,” Schwoerer said. Schwoerer’s family’s calves are fed milk until two months of age and then are given calf grain and hay to allow growth and stimulation of the rumen. When calves are eight months old, they will receive haylage or a total mixed ration. Once a heifer is pregnant, her diet is built to focus on the growth and development of her calf, Schwoerer said. Finally, when the cow freshens, it receives a high-protein diet to allow for the greatest amount of milk production. And show cows have unique nutritional needs, Schowerer said. “Show cattle are judged on their presence and appearance in the show ring. A judge looks for a dairy animal to be clean-cut, deep and, most importantly, dairy. [A] low-energy hay and a high-protein diet will ensure that the animal will keep off weight but will still continue to grow,” Schwoerer said. The process of showing a cow involves many months of preparation. In March, Schwoerer selected her show animals based on mobility, soundness of feet and legs and the style and blending of parts, such as the head into the shoulder and the back into the body. Once the animals are picked, a high-protein diet and pasture access is given to allow for exercise. Cow hair is also an important part of showing. Schwoerer rinses her animals with cold water at night and washes them every other day. Once a month, she shaves all the hair leaving the topline and belly, creating strong and healthy hair by showtime. “Before showing, cows need to be clear of any diseases. This includes no ringworm or warts,” Schwoerer said. “This year, lactating cows had to undergo an avian influenza test.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Fair attendees and exhibitors are at higher risk of infection from animal influenza viruses, but preventative measures such as avian flu testing for each animal and following preventative actions such as hand-washing and avoiding sick animals can prevent the spread. Cow health and nutrition are critical to showing prized cows, improving human diets The aspect of showing doesn’t just involve a beautiful cow getting judged in a ring. Cow health and nutrition play a large role in keeping these cows healthy and creating larger milk yields, according to Matt Akins, a dairy scientist and research leader for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Agricultural Research Service Dairy Forage Research Center in Marshfield, Wisconsin. “Nutrition can have great impacts on cow health, including ensuring adequate fiber, energy, protein, minerals and vitamins are provided in the diet to meet the cow’s needs for milk production and maintaining their bodies,” Akins told the Cardinal. Fiber maintains the health of a cow’s rumen by allowing for stimulation of cow chewing and saliva production, which helps avoid acidic rumen conditions, Akins said. Protein and essential amino acids that are important for a cow’s diet and immune function to help prevent pathogens. Vitamins and minerals, such as zinc for hoof health, selenium and vitamin E for immune function and choline for liver function play key roles in improving cow health. As with the important nutrients needed for a cow's overall health, their diet also plays a large role in maintaining health and high milk yield, Akins said. “50 to 70% of the cow’s diet is forage depending on the quality and nutritive value. Forages fed include alfalfa silage or hay, corn silage, grass silage or hay and other fibrous forages needed to ensure good rumen health,” Akins said. A cow’s diet not only affects the amount of milk they produce, but also the quality of their milk that humans consume. There is a direct relationship between nutrition quality and milk quality in cows, Akins said. “Cows that are grazed on pasture and consuming fresh forage have been found to have increased levels of carotenoids in the milk and changes in milk fat profiles,” Akins said. Carotenoids are naturally occurring plant pigments mammals only obtain through their diet. Some carotenoids have been found to increase vitamin A intake, have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties and improve ocular and cognitive health. Milk can drastically improve the vitamin A intake in human diets. Cows that receive a high quality forage diet have increased carotenoid levels in their milk, which therefore affects human consumption. In order for a cow to receive adequate nutrition, nutritionists play a large role on dairy farms. Akins told the Cardinal nutritionists help balance forages with supplemental feeds to meet nutrient requirements. They also keep up to date with new nutritional research and knowledge to help better a cow’s diet. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by The Daily Cardinal | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Art is central to protest in Madison. Here's how its mediums have changed campus From the Vietnam War to pro-Palestine encampments, art as a form of protest and political expression has long been central to UW-Madison’s history. By Annika Bereny October 24, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In June of 1991, two members of LGBTQ+ rights organization Act Up! Madison put on diapers, bibs and frilly bonnets. They were protesting the denial of day care services to an HIV-positive mother in Madison, and though their method was uncommon, it garnered attention through art. Madison is known for its extensive history of protest. But art and different forms of self-expression have been central to both social life and protest at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Many look back on protests during the Civil Rights and anti-war movement in the 1960s and 1970s and characterize them as just chants, marches or the occasional sit-in. But there was also creation — from graffiti, music, paintings, performances, poems and more, artivism has become central to UW-Madison. As the Elvehjem building was constructed in 1966, soon to become the Chazen Museum of Art, a plywood fence around it became filled with political graffiti and street art. Messages such as “Where is Lee Harvey Oswald now that we really need him?” were commonplace on the fence, alongside “Lock up McNamara, throw away Ky,” a reference to the secretary of defense and South Vietnamese prime minister. At its inception, the Chazen had already hosted UW-Madison’s protest art. “Art has been used as a political device, protest or otherwise, for propaganda or for conveying an agenda of some sort,” Katherine Alcauskas, the chief curator of the Chazen, told The Daily Cardinal. “In fine art and in poster production, there's a lot of ways that images can tell very meaningful stories.” Artwork, whether intended to be political or not, is often adopted by a political cause, she continued. Amid the anti-war movement of the 1960s, UW-Madison students and faculty channeled anger toward police brutality through art. Warrington Colescott, professor emeritus of printmaking and painting at UW-Madison, created a piece in 1969 called “Out of a Garden Window” while teaching. Colescott depicts a protester being beaten and arrested by police, with other protesters being corralled away and an audience forming in front of their suburban houses. It is thought to be directly inspired by the anti-Vietnam war protests on campus. This piece appeared as part of a 2018 exhibit “Print in Protest” at the Chazen, highlighting the role of UW-Madison’s printmaking department in the school’s history of protest. Decades later, during the Black Lives Matter protests in the summer of 2020, murals in Madison and nationwide commemorated victims of police brutality and called for change. Both officially commissioned murals from the city of Madison and solo graffiti were found on walls and boarded up windows all across town. Colescott’s piece reflects both the attitudes of yesterday as well as today. His art is timeless, demonstrating the longevity of anti-police brutality action and activism Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Aside from visual art, protest can also be created for the other senses, such as music and spoken word. In Madison, the Forward! Marching Band, founded during the Act 10 protests, spent weeks playing around the Capitol in protest. Since then, the group has “dedicated itself to maintaining that unique fighting spirit of the Wisconsin protest movement.” During the #TheRealUW movement in 2016, UW students, alumni and faculty of color rebuked the racism they had been subjected to while students at UW-Madison, a one-day-only exhibit was held at the Chazen called “Unhood Yourself: The Real UW.” “It will be impossible to ignore the energy and passion that each of the artists bring to the Chazen,” the exhibit’s press release read. “Here, they will live in expression and present the truth. Without veils, without anonymity, unhooded.” In addition to spoken word performances, this exhibit included photography and collages from students who led the movement online, meant to “engulf” students in the day-to-day experience of their classmates of color. Recently, specific iconography and phrases, often in support of the pro-Palestine movement, on protest banners have become subject to confiscation by law enforcement officials. And, with the recent implementation of UW-Madison’s “expressive activity” policy, protest art may be in danger, at least while 25 feet from a campus building. Yet, some fight to keep this tradition alive. The Division of Arts administers an artivism grant for students who demonstrate an interest in activism through art. In the 2022-2023 school year, the grant funded 12 projects using a total of $12,400 and plans to reopen applications for the current school year later in the semester. Student publication the Madison Journal of Literary Criticism has been a recipient of this grant multiple times. Editor-in-Chief Landis Varughese told The Daily Cardinal the effects of artivism, including the experiences and art of Palestinians during Israel’s ongoing war in Gaza, is crucial to social change. “[Art] makes entry points to activism much more accessible because people may not be really inclined to read dense theory about political activism,” Varughese said. “For people who are halfway around the world, who may not be able to fully comprehend [the Palestinians’] strife firsthand, the way that they can be able to have a glimpse into their world for even just for a second through art is really powerful. And it's able to show us that we aren't so distant, after all.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Laila Smith | The Daily Cardinal ARTS UW-Madison students are redefining campus as a place for indie film The unique combination of an arthouse theater and the eager spirit of Madison film students sets UW-Madison apart from other schools. By Paige Stevenson November 10, 2023 | 3:00am CST Madison may not look like a city with a swiftly developing film scene, but University of Wisconsin-Madison film students continue to exhibit unmatched spirit and perseverance in their efforts to redefine their community as the place to go for film. Jared Rosenthal, film student and Badger Film Group founder, said Madison’s film community stands out because of the Midwest people and culture that surrounds it. But Rosenthal said what really makes Madison a good place for filmmaking is the fact that its students are able to connect with the community while still staying true to themselves. UW’s Cinematheque, a theater located in Vilas Communication Hall, stands as a physical example of Madison’s position within the film world as the city begins to host a plethora of new film festivals and attract more film students. The Cinematheque screens a large variety of lesser-known arthouse and international movies, ranging from 35mm French classics to high-definition stories from Nigeria. It’s a refuge for filmgoers in a local theater industry decimated by recent closures. “We’ve lost 11 theatrical screens here in Madison, so we at the Cinematheque have sometimes been the only theatrical exhibitors of independent cinema,” said Jim Healy, Cinematheque’s director of programming. For the Cinematheque, this means more of a student presence at their screenings. International, indie films drive Cinematheque’s success Healy believes the draw of the Cinematheque, even beyond the pandemic, is the selection of films offered. “By not being a multiplex cinema that shows whatever is going to make the most money that weekend … means to stand apart from a monolithic culture, and that is represented by international cinema,” Healy said. “Multiplexes don't regularly show movies from Iran or France.” The Cinematheque rarely screens modern, box-office hits. Instead, they focus programming on smaller films that represent the American indie film scene and showcase the success and creativity of international pictures. Every story is unique as each culture and filmmaker approaches their work with diverse perspectives and styles that wouldn’t necessarily appear in more commercially-oriented films. Rosenthal feels exposing student filmmakers to international films illustrates unique film techniques and serves as valuable inspiration for students to push the envelope of film. If students see avant-garde, oddball indie films as successful works of art, they may be more willing to get experimental with their own art and film things they are truly passionate about. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “It all comes down to just creativity and being diligent,” Rosenthal said. “Whether it's international or not, obviously there [are] different values in different cultures and countries. Taking inspiration from any film is going to help create your own style.” These personal perspectives are reflected in film students at Madison. The Cinematheque’s roots in student culture sets it apart from other schools, especially for students like Rosenthal. Much of Madison’s independent film community stems from the school itself and the connections students make with each other through pathways like the Cinematheque and the Madison Film Festival, which Rosenthal launched in August. Their efforts to provide students with a broad, globe-spanning agenda of independent film fosters a desire to learn from different film cultures and forges connections between local and international ideas. “Students understand the culture and what the community needs. It’s about finding the balance between telling your own story and also finding a way to get a community to rally behind that story,” Rosenthal said. Coming-of-age genre films lead Madison’s renaissance The exploration of coming-of-age themes in student productions points to the continuity between student filmmakers and films shown at the Cinematheque. Coming-of-age films explore characters who must grapple with the world they live in, decide what they stand for and how they’ll fight for it. Healy said this can be an extremely isolating experience, especially in a world that praises conformity and silences against-the-grain thinking. “It’s something cinema can portray, not just loneliness … but the idea of standing up against something that seems monolithic and overbearing,” Healy said. Although Rosenthal said plenty of Madison student filmmakers experiment with coming-of-age films, he and others have worked on films about war and jazz, too. No matter what project he’s focused on, he puts all his energy into it — a quality other UW-Madison film students share. These filmmakers have a perspective very similar to the ones depicted on screen, he said, and their work feels more authentic as a result. “At the end of the day, it’s really just make believe with a few cameras, so every story is unique in its own way,” Rosenthal said. “Give it everything you got, and that means fighting through the pain because there are inherent struggles to every single film you make.” Rosenthal knows building Madison’s film reputation will take time. But he’s optimistic that as Madison film students go on to bigger and better things, they’ll give back to the community that supported their success, further cementing Madison as the hot new place for film. Until then, Madison will continue to harbor a plucky indie film scene. “With this unified sense of community effort of creatives coming together here over the last few years … it makes sense why people would want to tell stories and learn and grow here,” Rosenthal said. Maybe this is just because it’s a small, growing community of eager film students with unique perspectives on film, but UW-Madison film students will tell you this is because it represents the key virtue behind indie film: authenticity. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Theonewhoknowsnothingatall/Wikimedia Commons LIFE & STYLE Harrison Butker’s commencement address stirred controversy. What does it mean for free speech at universities? Kansas City Chiefs kicker Harrison Butker spoke at Benedictine College’s 2024 commencement, drawing controversy for his comments on women and the LGBTQ+ community. But his speech raises questions about university free speech nationally. By Rebekah Irby July 25, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Kansas City Chiefs kicker Harrison Butker delivered a graduation speech on May 11 for Benedictine College’s 2024 graduating class, stirring conflict for controversial comments about women and the LGBTQ+ community. Butker suggested to female students that despite their degrees, they will be most excited to become wives and mothers. He then alluded to his own wife, saying that her life did not start until she began her “vocation as a wife and mother.” He then went on to allude to the LGBTQ+ community, and said that pride was a “deadly sin” that has “a whole month dedicated to it.” The address is highly debated publically, but many, including fellow NFL star Patrick Mahomes, continue to defend the NFL star. The University of Wisconsin-Madison similarly has a history of controversial speakers on campus which raises concerns about who should and shouldn’t be given a voice at a public university. UW-Madison is home to thousands of students, all of varying backgrounds. Though UW remains steadfast in its commitment to uphold diversity, equity and inclusion, some of the University’s past speakers have raised questions about how the University maintains these standards. UW-Madison’s past decisions on campus speakers have led to student uproar, and mass protest across campus. Most notably, conservative commentators Ben Shapiro and Matt Walsh’s campus events stirred student protests due to comments on the LGBTQ+ community and other social issues. But the difference here lies in the audience. Walsh and Shapiro were both invited to the university by student-led organizations where the audience was aware they would cover vital social and political issues — unlike Butker’s commencement speech. UW-Madison’s defense of Walsh and Shapiro’s right to speak on campus utilized the same talking points as Butker speech defenders: the right to free speech. And though freedom of speech is a core pillar of American values, it also generates questions about when speech becomes harmful. On a campus that boasts inclusivity and diversity, providing a platform to speakers who actively discriminate against current students elevates campus unease. During Walsh’s speech in 2022, the commentator screened his film “What is a Woman?,” a film that actively refutes the right of transgender people to exist. The event resulted in vandalism and protests all over campus, with students supporting their trans peers and denouncing the university for allowing Walsh to speak. The university responded by essentially endorsing Walsh’s right to speak and screen his film on campus, as well as reaffirming their commitment to creating an inclusive campus environment. Further, the university reiterated that Walsh’s opinions are not a reflection of UW-Madison’s ideology. They called this their “dual commitment” alleging that they can uphold both concepts at once. Similarly, when Shapiro visited, students protested and called for him to leave campus for his comments about trans people, as well as his statement regarding the ongoing war in Gaza. Shapiro is already a highly debated commentator, who has made a career out of visiting Universities and other institutions to discuss his opinions, as well as host debates. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email His invitation to UW-Madison from Young Americans for Freedom sparked controversy, hosting a talk called “Stop Being Apologetic about the Superiority of Western Values.” Many of Shapiro’s talking points surrounded the war in Gaza, and included the commentator criticizing UW-Madison’s lack of condemnation for Hamas’ attack on Israel. He said a comment from Chancellor Mnookin was not sufficient. UW-Madison is a public university with over 40,000 students from various backgrounds. Although the university is responsible for allowing the expression of all students’ opinions, no matter how controversial, it also has an equal responsibility to foster a safe and inclusive environment. A part of that responsibility is ensuring university speakers do not discriminate against current students or give a platform to views that threaten them. But UW-Madison seems to have difficulty navigating this issue, often supporting the voices of some students over others, leaving marginalized students feeling underrepresented and unsafe on campus. Legally, denying speakers in a public institution violates the rights outlined in the first amendment. As a public institution, UW-Madison cannot prohibit public speech, even if it is rhetoric that the student body may disagree with. Despite the University’s obligation to uphold the right to free speech, there still remains the issue of the student body itself. Inviting commentators that incite violence and protest, or cause students to feel unsafe on campus, is ultimately controversial, and causes mistrust between the University and the student body. Which is then more important: upholding the right to free speech or protecting students? Often, UW-Madison seems to lean toward the former, creating a campus environment that makes students from underrepresented communities feel unprotected by an institution that adamantly affirms their commitment to diversity, equity and inclusion efforts. This “dual commitment” UW-Madison attempts to uphold often becomes unsatisfactory for students, with many feeling violated or unsafe by University speakers. Butker’s speech may have stirred controversy, but it has also led to much-needed conversations at universities across the country. UW-Madison faces the same challenge as all public institutions, balancing the right to free expression as well as student’s right to safety and inclusion. Upholding both remains an uphill battle, as the University continues to struggle with inviting free speech on campus, while also creating an environment that is welcoming for all students. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Rebekah IrbyRebekah Irby is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
The UW-Madison law building photographed on Dec. 4, 2024. Photo by Emma Schieffer | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Instructors from conservative law firm will teach UW law course, drawing student criticism The University of Wisconsin–Madison Law School hired Skylar Croy and Daniel Lennington to teach a constitutional law course this upcoming spring semester. Some students, who attended clerkship programs WILL sued to alter diversity requirements, disagree By Wanwa Omot December 5, 2024 | 5:00am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison law student Mary Berg was shocked and upset when she learned attorneys from conservative law firm the Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty (WILL), Skylar Croy and Daniel Lennington, would be teaching a Constitutional Amendments course next spring. The course — “Selected Problems in Constitutional Law: Constitutional Litigation" — focuses on the Reconstruction Amendments: the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments of the United States Constitution. Students will draw expertise from landmark cases such as Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) and Brown v. Board of Education (1954), according to a draft syllabus obtained by The Daily Cardinal. Berg says the hiring of Croy by the law school is “astounding” because Croy “intentionally puts students in harm’s way,” according to her statement sent to UW Law School deans obtained by the Cardinal. Berg participated in the Wisconsin State Bar’s Diversity Clerkship Program, a summer employment program for law students. WILL sued the State Bar in December 2023, claiming the program was unconstitutional for discriminating against students on the basis of race and other “immutable characteristics” in their diversity definition. Croy told WPR in a statement defeating “unconstitutional DEI (diversity, equity and inclusion) programs” has become the WILL’s area of expertise. The firm specializes in culture war topics and is also suing the federal government over the McNair Scholarship for underrepresented students. During the lawsuit, partially redacted documents including student’s personal statements, resumes and contact information — including Berg’s — were made available on WILL’s website. “That kind of freaked me out more than anything. Given the atmosphere surrounding these conversations…I think it’s pretty easy for you and I to conceptualize the kind of harassment,” Berg said. “Some people want to enroll in this course and really use this as a test of their ideological strength. I am not one of those people.” The litigation of the constitutionality of programs like the Diversity Clerkship Program has increased since the U.S. Supreme Court rejected affirmative action in June 2023. The State Bar and WILL settled in April 2024, with the program continuing with a modified version of the definition of diversity which includes more language of the diversity of experiences and viewpoints. Croy and Lennigton have criticized the law school directly, demanding it remove content from the school’s “Re-Orientation” program, a mandatory program for all first-year law students. WILL argued that the school was “pushing racist ideology on law students.” Despite their criticism of the law school, Croy says he has a lot of respect for the law school and the course will be neutral in viewpoints. Students can expect a “run-of-the-mill” course, learning about procedural matters when arguing in cases involving the Reconstruction Amendments that outlawed slavery, granted citizenship to those born or naturalized in the United States and prohibited federal and state governments from denying citizen’s right to vote “on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” respectively. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I think it would be very good for students to try to get in a class like this with instructors that they have some concerns about, because if your goal in life is to someday go to court and argue against organizations like WILL, what better way to prep for that?” Croy said. Berg said she does not have a problem with the course itself or that attorneys from a conservative law firm will teach but rather the fact that it’s being taught by Croy and Lennington, who specifically published Berg’s and others’ personal records, obtained through a public records request. UW-Madison spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Croy and Lennington were fully qualified to teach the course. “We are committed to fostering a diversity of viewpoints, and having these instructors teach this course furthers that goal,” Lucas said. Other law students like Samantha Crane plan to take the course next semester and look forward to learning more about constitutional law. “Why are UW Law students upset about a reconstruction amendments course being taught this spring?,” Crane said in a Tweet. “If people are upset about it, I would say that I think people should take the class,” Crane said. Croy and Lennington have previously crossed paths with UW Law School. Croy graduated in 2019 second in his class from UW Law School, Order of the Coif, and served as the editor-in-chief of the Wisconsin Law Review. This will be both Croy and Lennington’s first time teaching at UW Law School. Editor's Note: This story was last updated at 11:30 a.m. on Dec. 8, 2024. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Kazuo Ishiguro is an acclaimed author, but "The Buried Giant" shows that his writing can lack profundity. Photo by Image courtesy of Amazon | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ?‘The Buried Giant’ will make you wonder why its Nobel Prize-winning author won the Nobel Prize By Martin Rakacolli May 27, 2018 | 1:05pm CDT You’re perched atop Vilas Hall on an edge of the rooftop. The campus sprawls out beneath you, stray pedestrians going about their day. A perceptive woman notices you. The two of you wave, and then the woman returns to her business. It takes a while, but when classes end you’re still up there. The doors open and the sidewalks start to fill. Give it about 30 seconds. Then, after the crowds of people make it difficult to see the sidewalk below you, take the pebble you brought with you and throw it. The pebble is small. You don’t know the wind speed or which direction you’re facing. Perhaps your wrist is sprained, or maybe it’s healthy. Odds are the pebble landed in the street. But if it hit a person, it probably hit someone who is a better writer than Kazuo Ishiguro. In 2017, I woke up to find that Ishiguro had snagged the Nobel Prize in Literature away from Margaret Atwood and Ismail Kadare against all odds (this is not to say these authors deserved it, but rather that Ishiguro was an unconventional choice). My initial reaction was unnecessarily visceral based on my experiences with his writing. To be frank, it was beyond me why any serious critic would think he deserved it. “The Buried Giant” is the story of Axl and Beatrice, an old couple in a post-Arthurian Britain where memory is either dulled or faded entirely. They leave to visit a son neither of them remember very well and are caught up in a dragonslaying quest that will presumably restore memory to Britain. At least, that’s what the book is ostensibly about. From reading the plot synopsis on Wikipedia, one would be forgiven for thinking that Axl and Beatrice actually had no role to play in the story. All the actions that push the narrative forward are done by other characters, and our main couple’s role in the plot is to have things happen to them. I find that this kind of story is significantly less interesting on average, because it gives the author less time to develop the cast and creates a feeling that the plot isn’t going anywhere. Not that this kind of story can’t work, but it has to be based on making the characters’ responses to the outside influences interesting and distinct. This is the central tension of all tragedies: We either know or suspect what will happen, but the important part is how. Ishiguro doesn’t manage this. Without getting into specifics, the dragon is slayed and the couple regain traumatic memories about each other. They go through the motions of a rift and the book ends on an ambiguous note, each uncertain if they still love the other. This could have been powerful, but Ishiguro again robs the characters of their agency, introducing a ferryman to (what is implied to be) the afterlife who will take them both only if they love each other. There’s no serious attempt to work through the characters’ dilemma by analyzing the basis of their relationship or examining what “love” meant to either of them: The ferryman becomes the decider. Particularly disappointing is that, when it comes time for the ferryman to interview each of the main characters separately, we only get Axl’s perspective. However, the alternative could have just as easily been disappointing, because — even on a technical level — I do not consider Ishiguro a very good writer. His prose is clean and competent but otherwise unremarkable. His dialogue, however, is mediocre at best. Ishiguro makes a half-hearted attempt to “mimic” the language of Arthurian legend. What this means is that people speak in unnecessarily florid sentences with the same polite tone throughout the entire book, and they end up sounding like each other. It’s a bit silly, actually, and at times hard to take seriously. This isn’t E.R. Eddison’s “The Worm Ouroboros,” which was thoroughly researched and meticulously written in an archaic version of the English language. I suppose it wouldn’t be such an issue if large sections of the book weren’t filled with dialogue. Much exposition is handled by having other characters explain what’s going on to Axl and Beatrice, then conjuring up some reason to move them along. It becomes repetitive, particularly because the relationship between the two leads doesn’t develop and isn’t explored until the very end. And there really isn’t much else. There’s very little tension and the pacing is slow. Ishiguro is too busy being profound to write an exciting story. He’s also too busy being generic to write a profound one. I really do think generic is the word. Ishiguro has nothing interesting or new to say about memory or identity, and he doesn’t have a compelling way to frame what he’s saying. From people I’ve talked to who have read “Never Let Me Go,” his most famous book is similar. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email So why, then, does Ishiguro get so much praise? I think it has more to do with the culture surrounding literature than anything Ishiguro actually wrote. There’s a vein of misery running through literature, dating all the way back to the Greeks but seen more recently in the Brontë sisters and, later on, William Faulkner (and even more recently Cormac McCarthy, a mediocre writer Ishiguro has expressed great admiration for). Critics have a bad habit of mistaking misery for profundity, forgetting that, while Faulkner wrote about human misery, he framed it by emphasizing the human spirit at the center of it all — Patty Jenkins did the same thing in her movie “Monster.” Additionally, his dialogue was really good: “It never bothered me much,” he said. “You mean, it never bothered Anse much,” I said. “No more than it bothered him to throw that poor devil down in the street and handcuff him like a damn murderer. Dont tell me. And dont tell me it aint going to bother you to have to limp around on one short leg for the balance of your life—if you walk at all again. Concrete.” I said. “God Almighty, why didn’t Anse carry you to the nearest sawmill and stick your leg in the saw? That would have cured it. Then you could have stuck his head into the saw and cured a whole family…” —William Faulkner, “As I Lay Dying” By taking away the characters’ memory, Ishiguro depicted love as mere attraction, based more on habit and a vague sense of past kindness than on the struggles, arguments, tribulations and, yes, kindnesses that real relationships are based off of. His portrayal of it and of memory bears little resemblance to the real thing, and I suspect the reasoning is that these things just don’t really matter to him. Like those critics, Ishiguro has stratified emotions into tiers of importance. Whereas happiness ranks decidedly near the bottom, unhappiness is firmly in the top tier. At least it is above laughter, though — Ishiguro is aggressively unfunny. As bizarre as it sounds, this is the same problem DC Comics has right now with its movies: Your works don’t have to be funny and they don’t have to be lighthearted, but if the only emotions you care to develop and expand are the dark ones, then it becomes hard to relate to a work or find something profound in it. Real life is complex, and unhappiness is no more or less profound than happiness, love and, indeed, laughter. Quite frankly, if Kazuo Ishiguro doesn’t understand this principle by now, then I doubt he’ll ever write a book worth reading. He has been writing for a long time, but “The Buried Giant” was released in 2015 and feels like it could be a decent writer’s lackluster first book — not a work by a Nobel Prize-winning writer. Give it to that person you hit with the pebble instead. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Photo by Drew Wesson | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH After 40 years, Bus Rapid Transit has redefined Madison BRT’s long-awaited debut this fall has helped streamline Madison’s public transportation system, but it’s taken a lot of planning to get to this point. By John Ernst December 5, 2024 | 5:00am CST Chris Phistry has lived his whole life in Wisconsin’s capital. When he began working on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus as a front desk agent at the Fluno Center five years ago, Phistry needed a way to commute into the city from his west side residence. In Madison, the choice is clear: he takes the bus. Five days a week, Phistry takes the bus to downtown, and in September, he began using the brand-new Bus Rapid Transit system. “In the last 40 years, I've been paying attention to the bus system,” Phistry said. “I’ve seen it shift from a much wider coverage of the city to concentrating a lot more on the corridors that see the most service.” BRT as a whole has been a growing movement in American cities, with cities like Madison receiving federal funding though the Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill and Small Starts Grants to implement and build their systems. Wisconsin’s capital city isn’t the first. The federal government has been funding BRT systems since the first lines debuted in Pittsburgh in the early 1980s. As of 2016, there were over 300 miles of BRT service in the U.S., according to the Federal Transit Administration. Route A, the BRT line Phistry takes to and from work, services the east-west corridor of Madison, running just past I-90 on the east side to Junction Road on the west side. On Sept. 22, Madison Metro Transit launched the line, debuting a project over 40 years in the making. In 2012, Metro Transit Capital Projects Manager Mike Cechvala and his colleagues at the Greater Madison Metropolitan Planning Organization drew the first map of the BRT system, running through the same east-west corridor that Phristry and other commuters use every day. The city formally applied for a federal grant to fund the project in 2017 when Cechvala was working for Metro Transit, he told The Daily Cardinal. After a $107 million investment in 2022, Madison received a $110.6 million construction grant for the project from the FTA in 2023. The Biden administration announced plans to allocate an additional $118.1 million in funding to Madison’s proposed second BRT line, running through the city’s north-south corridor, which is expected to open in 2028, Cechvala said. ‘A generational improvement’ Construction for Madison’s initial BRT project began in 2022 and was divided into three contracts: early works, main body and widen sidewalk. Cechvala said much of the construction dedicated to the new stations, bus lanes and infrastructure was part of the main body project. As part of the BRT system, Metro Transit implemented several new features for the ease of travel, streamlining of transit and sustainability efforts. On the roads, passengers can expect to see a few changes, including new stations and bus-designated lanes painted red. There were 31 new stations constructed for the BRT, according to Cechvala. Stations are equipped with benches, heaters and overhead covering. Each contains a farebox where riders can reload their cards with cash, and real time tracking to give minute-by-minute updates on when passengers can expect the buses to arrive. They’re also raised off the ground, allowing for easier accessibility on and off the bus. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I think [the stations] are super nice,” Jack, a graduate student at UW-Madison, said. “I haven't used the heater yet, [but] I'm sure I'll appreciate [it] when it's zero degrees.” Cechvala said the new stations offer good infrastructure and services that are simply easier to use. “If you see a bus stop sign on the side of the street, I think to most people, they look at that and it's just kind of invisible,” Cechvala said. “If you see the BRT stations and see the real time signs, it kind of feels [easier]. It's respectful to people who ride the bus.” Jack has noticed the bus-only lanes have allowed buses to bypass traffic during particularly busy times of the day, such as weekday rush hour. Jack, who lives near the UW-Health University Hospital, has made Route A, which runs down University Avenue westbound, his main mode of transportation. Madison’s BRT also debuted their new fleet of electric buses purchased from New Flyer, Cechvala said. The electric buses will work on Route A and service some of campus buses like Route 80. The buses will be charged on the opposite ends of the line, but also are capable of en route charging, allowing them to run throughout the day, he said. The buses are also a crucial part of cooperation between the city of Madison and UW-Madison, with the latter assisting with the purchase of the buses, according to UW-Madison Transportation Services. A spokesperson for UW-Madison Transportation Services told the Cardinal that although the project predated Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin’s sustainability initiatives, the project will be a crucial part of her goals and help accelerate sustainable progress. Metro Transit will spend the next few months improving the service of Route A before turning their attention to Route B, Cechvala said. For Phistry, Jack and the thousands of others will use the BRT, the next months and years will determine the success of the new line. “This is a generational improvement,” Cechvala said. “We really hope that this investment pays off, and we're really excited about BRT and glad that people are using it.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Wisconsin Tuition Promise to cover the cost of low-income students at UW System campuses. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Cardinal View: UW-Madison expression policies shape debate on only their terms. This restricts student dialogue In wake of the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s new expressive policy and neutrality statement, The Daily Cardinal believes these sentiments disregard the Wisconsin Idea and could censor important student protests. By The Daily Cardinal Editorial Board October 29, 2024 | 11:29am CDT In the wake of student demonstrations last semester, officials at the University of Wisconsin-Madison have updated their policies regarding expressive speech on campus and public statements as an institution. While the university champions the free discussion of ideas in our campus community, the reality of these policies tells a different story — one that stands against the Wisconsin Idea. In August, the university released the updated policy, now called the Expressive Activity Policy, to clarify restrictions of protesting on campus while also reiterating current policies. This includes restricting expressive activity — which can include protests, speeches and chants — within 25 feet of all university building entrances, limitations on size for indoor signs, restrictions on certain sound amplifications and restricting activities in certain areas on campus, like the Abraham Lincoln Statue, during certain hours of the day. The policy also outlines how UWPD is able to extend the 25-foot distance further if safety is at risk. In concept, the new student demonstration guidelines are designed to safeguard students’ right to safely protest. In practice, the Expressive Activity Policy has the possibility to not only restrict student expression, but stand in direct opposition to the university’s mission of fostering the Wisconsin Idea “that education should influence people’s lives beyond the boundaries of the classroom.” The university’s new Expressive Activity Policy forces students to reconsider the consequences of fighting for change, potentially creating a chilling effect out of fear student protesters could violate unclear rules. As student demonstrators reconsider their involvement in expressive political action, the administration has placed an important asterisk on the Wisconsin Idea — education should influence people’s lives beyond the classroom, but only on their terms. “The robust exchange of ideas and viewpoints is central to a university,” said Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin in a UW-Madison statement following the policy release. “That means that we will often engage with ideas and perspectives that may be new to us, and that might, in some cases, cause us unease or discomfort.” At face value, this makes sense. But, the question still remains: what’s the difference between a “robust exchange of ideas” and student demonstrations now deemed to be unacceptable? Moreover, is meaningful change always possible when activism is limited to a roundtable discussion tucked away in a university building? Following the updates to the Expressive Activity Policy, the university released the Institutional and Public Positions Statements policy, outlining when and how university officials will consider and institute public statements. The new policy determines university response on whether or not the topic directly impacts the “core mission or operations of the university or one or more of its units.” Once again, the guidelines of this new policy are ambiguous. By leaving statements up to the discretion of the university, it also sets up zero expectation for the university to address current events that deeply affect the wellbeing of the student body. What could be considered an impact to a “core mission or operation of the university?” “When the institution takes a point of view on a matter of public concern or controversy, however well intended, it risks crowding out other points of view… it risks harm to one of the most core and fundamental dimensions of a university: free and open debate,” Mnookin wrote in an email to students and staff. UW-Madison withdrawing itself from making statements is not the best way to encourage free and open discussions on campus. Students and community members alike should have the opportunity to critique and challenge statements made by the university, because those challenges have the possibility to spark meaningful changes on the institutional level. When it comes to addressing current events, the role of the university isn’t to serve as the final arbiter of right and wrong for the student body, but that doesn’t mean the institution should always pursue neutrality, especially when determined by a standard that’s unclear to the student body. Ideally, the university should be one of many voices in the “robust exchange of ideas” taking place on campus. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The bottom line is, when the university takes a stance, they take a risk — but if meaningful campus discourse in pursuit of the Wisconsin Idea is the priority, it’s one worth taking. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin loses winning record at Clearwater Invitational With a much more challenging schedule, the Wisconsin Badgers softball team lost all five games in Florida at the Clearwater Invitational. By Abby Shulman February 18, 2024 | 4:41pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers softball team dropped five straight tough losses and lost its winning record for the season Thursday, Friday, and Saturday at the Clearwater Invitational in Florida. Wisconsin took on the No. 4 Georgia Bulldogs in the first match of Thursday’s doubleheader. The Badgers led 4-0 by the end of the second, with RBIs from outfielder Brooke Kuffel and infielder Alivia Bark and a homerun from infielder Ellie Hubbard. The Bulldogs and the Badgers went back and forth for ten innings, with freshman Eden Echevarria crashing the party with the first hit of her career. It was an incredibly close game until Wisconsin fell short at the finish line and lost 6-7, no thanks to four fielding errors. During the bottom of the 10th, starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo came back and intentionally walked two batters, hoping the runner on third would be forced out at home, but Georgia singled down the middle to win the game. Wisconsin fell one run short in the second game of Thursday’s double-header, losing 5-6 to the No. 18 Kentucky Wildcats. Once again, the Badgers began with an early lead, this time 3-0 by the end of the first after catcher Emmy Wells crushed a first inning three-run homer over the left-field fence. Kentucky evened out the score in the second, pushing pitcher Gabi Salo out of the game and welcoming relief pitcher Shelby Jacobson. The Wildcats rallied to take the lead, but the Badgers tied the game 4-4 after outfielder Peyton Bannon stole home in the fourth. Kentucky then stole the lead back 4-6 after a sac bunt and a Wisconsin throwing error. Bannon scored again for Wisconsin with an RBI from catcher Hilary Blomberg, but the Badgers fell short in the rally after a closing double play from Kentucky. The Badgers dropped two more losses in Friday games. Wisconsin’s luck wasn’t any better in Friday’s doubleheader, losing to the No. 6 Oklahoma State Cowgirls and the UCF Knights. With two-run blasts from outfielder Brooke Kuffel and infielder Alivia Bark and an RBI single from infielder Ava Kuszak, the Badgers dominated OSU’s pitching in the first three innings, leading 5-2. The game slowed for the Badgers after the third when OSU’s bullpen was brought in, but the game had just started for the Cowgirls, who ended up finding their offense to win 5-9. In the Badgers’ second game of the day, Wisconsin and UCF rallied steadily back and forth until the Knights proved their dominance with an eight-run sixth inning, forcing the Badgers into a 9-21 loss. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The high-scoring game started with UCF scoring two single home runs off of Magnanimo in the first, which infielder Fiona Girardot evened out with her two-run single for Wisconsin. The second inning mirrored the first, with two runs from the Knights as the Badgers caught up with a homerun from Bannon. After two more runs from UCF in the third, Wisconsin one-upped them and took the lead 8-7 with hits from Bark, Blomberg and Wells to close the inning. UCF then collected six runs in the next two innings while Wisconsin found only one, a solo homer from Bark’s. Finally, Salo allowed eight runs from the Knights in the sixth inning to trigger the run role and close the game at 21-9. Wisconsin ended the tournament with one final loss on Saturday. Wisconsin also fell in their last game Saturday as the No. 5 Washington Huskies dominated both sides of the field. The Badgers lost 1-9— their fewest runs scored in a game the season— as their season record nosedived to 4-6. Continuing the strong starting trend for Wisconsin, Giradot hit a solo home run in the second, the team’s only run of the game and one of just the two hits, the other being from catcher Emily Bojan in the fifth. Meanwhile, Wisconsin’s pitchers walked eight Huskies and threw five wild pitches. Despite not sufficiently fighting through the five games in Clearwater, Wisconsin still notched home runs in all five games. The Badgers will look to regain their groove back next week in California at the Mary Nutter Collegiate Classic on Feb. 22-24. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Screenshot courtesy of SexyHappyCouple via OnlyFans THE BEET A tasteful review of former UW-La Crosse Chancellor Joe Gow’s erotic escapades Former University of Wisconsin-La Crosse Chancellor Joe Gow was recently fired by the Board of Regents for creating homemade pornographic videos with his wife, Carmen Wilson. The question remains: are the videos actually worth viewing? By Omar Waheed January 25, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. The University of Wisconsin-La Crosse’s well-endowed former Chancellor Joe Gow faced fire for his personal hobbies, but a deeper dive shows that our erotic educator is a lustful labellum whisked away by a unilaterally uptight university system. After the discovery of his pornographic channel with his wife, Gow and Carmen Wilson came under the public eye for keeping the spark in their marriage alive and continuously exploring their bodies in their golden years. But before the UW System Board of Regents took the time to really understand the erotic escapades of the concupiscent couple, Gow was erroneously ejected from his position as chancellor. Luckily, The Beet is willing to do what the Board of Regents wouldn’t and the cowardly other media outlets refused: subscribing to their OnlyFans and spending $35 to watch hours of Gow’s porn. Read the Cardinal’s tasteful, fair review of Gow’s career as a promising porn actor creatively stifled by educational bureaucracy. Passionate pounding The “Sexy Happy Couple” brings romance back in the bedroom and kitchen with thoughtfulness and care in their scenes. The production quality is much higher than most would expect from amateur porn, but the salary of a chancellor and a professor goes a long way to create a quality studio environment. Scenes are often split between their two romantic ventures of the “Sexy Happy Couple” and “Sexy Healthy Cooking.” The scenes often involve a third, famous porn actor, but what captures the essences of sexual exploration of the Gows comes from their individual scenes. “Bedroom Shenanigans” best exemplifies Gow and Wilson’s pornographic pursuit. In the scene, Gow and Wilson share their “whole story” as they called it, and give a recipe for a vegan Philly cheesesteak sandwich inspired by Joe’s time in Pennsylvania. Gow and Wilson lead a plant-based, vegan lifestyle that fuels their furious fornicating. The recipe looked appetizing. As someone who has been vegetarian on and off most of my life, I always appreciate a solid recipe that helps provide an alternative to consuming meat. The recipe calls for the use of pressed extra firm tofu, mushroom powder, onion powder, ground thyme, olive oil, tamari, a vegan Worcester sauce, browning liquid and food coloring to give it a more steak-like appearance, and a cup of water makes up the flavor before adding it to seitan. But no one is particularly interested in the cooking segment. In “Bedroom Shenanigans,” the plot is simple yet realistic. In the scene, Gow and Wilson come back from a nondescript reception. Joe pours a bottle of white wine for the two as they discuss issues with a company — parroting recruitment directives of university leadership. The two express their discontent with relationships with friends, work and why they hastily left the reception. The plot quickly progresses as Carmen tells Joe she has “something special under her dress,” and he takes one of his “special vitamins” before the two head toward the bedroom. It's powerful to see a man admit to erectile issues and take a pill to rectify that on camera. Male performance issues in the bedroom often intimidate men, but taking a moment to verbally state needing to take a pill and actually taking it on camera is a bold move to promote the growing awareness of men’s sexual health. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email In the bedroom, the two engage in some mutual nipple play and light dirty talk before getting down to business. The scenes and positions are nothing special — a lot of missionary and doggystyle — but the end of “Bedroom Shenanigans” leaves the viewer shocked. The money shot happens on Wilson’s stomach. Gow then immediately licks it from her body before kissing her with his now semen-soaked tongue. I don’t think that’s vegan. The evolution of love Our key takeaways from Gow and Wilson can be boiled down to: I should go vegetarian again, and sexual exploration in marriage is important. We often hear of stagnant sexual relationships from couples well into their marriage, but Joe and Carmen are 10 years into it after coming off previous divorces. Keeping the spark alive is something many struggle with. Attraction wanes, and couples need to constantly find new ways to keep the romance alive. The respect for each of their sexual desires through a fostered mutual understanding for a lifestyle many find to be deviant is exemplary of how to maintain a healthy relationship. The Board of Regents could take a few pointers from Gow and Wilson on how to grow a positive, healthy sexual relationship. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More I graduated from PETA University. Now I electroejaculate monkeys Catch me feds! I ballot stuffed 450 times in the 2024 election I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university
Attendees gather around the second floor of the Capitol Rotunda to admire the Christmas tree at the 2024 Holiday Tree Lighting Ceremony on December 5, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks Gov. Tony Evers joined Smokey Bear in leading the Annual Tree Lighting Ceremony at the state Capitol. By Maria Knaack December 6, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wreaths and big red bows adorned the room as Wisconsinites and community members of all ages gathered in the Capitol Rotunda Thursday with Gov. Tony Evers for the annual Holiday Tree Lighting Ceremony, which included special guest Smokey Bear. This year’s theme for the green 30-foot balsam fir is “125 years of Wisconsin’s State Parks” to launch a celebration for the anniversary in 2025. The first state park in Wisconsin, Interstate Park, opened in 1900, and Wisconsin now boasts 50 state parks. Kids, students and families sent in homemade ornaments to decorate the tree, sharing what the state parks mean to them. The ornaments featured Wisconsin’s native animals and plants, natural features and favorite outdoor activities such as kayaking and camping. Wisconsin Department of Tourism Secretary Anne Sayers welcomed the audience and spoke along with Robin Schmidt, a Natural Resources Board member who shared a personal anecdote of visiting state parks with family. “Regardless of age, we all benefit from these experiences that will last a lifetime,” Schmidt said. At the ceremony Evers shared his appreciation for state parks. “As governor, I’ve had the privilege of visiting at least a dozen state parks just in the last few years. I think we can all agree we are fortunate to be surrounded by so much natural beauty every day. Wisconsin is a treasure of natural beauty and wonder,” Evers said. After a countdown, Smokey Bear joined a 7th grader, who shared stories of her experience with and love for Wisconsin’s state parks, to push the button and light up the tree’s LED lights. Wauwatosa East Orchestra played festive holiday music for the second year in a row. Rich Burke and the Burke family in Rhinelander donated this year’s tree, making this the second year in a row that the Capitol’s tree came from the Rhinelander area. The tree was selected for its height and natural shape, never having been trimmed, and was cut down in a ceremony last month. This follows a tradition of selecting a tree from Wisconsin landowners, honoring the state’s heritage of forestry. The tree will be displayed in the Capitol Rotunda through the end of the year for the public to see. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Jeff Miller/UW-Madison Photo by Jeff Miller | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS State commission rules UW Health not legally required to recognize nurses union The decision leaves UW Health's ability to recognize the nurses union in legal limbo. By Zoe Kukla December 2, 2022 | 2:00am CST The Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission (WERC) ruled on Nov. 25 that UW Health hospital is not legally required to recognize or negotiate a contract with the recently created nurses union, UW Nurses United, or negotiate contracts. The WERC’s ruling found UW Health was not subject to the Wisconsin Peace Act under Act 10, meaning it is up to UW Health to determine whether they will recognize and broker a contract with the nurses union. Act 10, passed in 2011 under former Republican Gov. Scott Walker, restricted most unions and collective bargaining rights for public workers and sparked months of protests upon its passing. UW Nurses United and the UW hospital previously agreed in September to let the WERC judge the union's legality in exchange for no strikes and monthly meetings between nurses and the hospitals. UW Health nurses Mary Jorgensen, Colin Gillis and Sarah Langland dissented from the WERC’s decision in a statement issued last week. "The opinion by the Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission (WERC) does not impact our union membership or the Meet and Discuss process at UW Health,” the nurses said. “While we respect WERC, we do not agree with its opinion that UW Health nurses are excluded from the Employment Peace Act." UW Nurses plan to appeal the commission's decision through state courts and petition for a union election with the National Labor Relations Board, according to their statement. UW Health may be able to voluntarily recognize the nurses union even if they are not legally required to recognize it, according to a formal opinion released by Attorney General Josh Kaul in June. However, UW Health plans to petition the Wisconsin Supreme Court for legal clarity on the issue, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Senate Minority Leader Melissa Agard (D-Madison) voiced her support for the nurses and expressed disappointment in the WERC’s decision in a statement Monday. "While the decision by WERC is disappointing, it is not surprising,” Agard said. “More importantly, WERC's decision does not change the September agreement between nurses and the administration." UW Health nurses, management, Gov. Tony Evers and Service Employees International Union Healthcare Wisconsin (SEIU) reached a historic agreement in September to jointly address UW nurses’ concerns and create a path towards quality patient care and nurse retention at UW hospitals. While the agreement did not officially recognize the Nurses Union, it offered hope for better relations between the nurses and UW Health executives for the first time since a previous nurses union contract expired in 2014. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email An estimated 2,600 nurses of UW Nurses United remained unified to find a collective bargaining solution despite last week’s legal setback. "UW nurses are at the forefront of a national movement of working people – Black, brown, AAPI, white and indigenous – who are organizing across race, place and industry,” UW Nurses United said in a statement. “We are continuing to build our union and work collectively with the administration to ensure UW Health is the best place to work and receive care." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Zoe KuklaZoe Kukla is the special pages editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the graphics editor, a photographer and is a senior staff writer who reported for state news. Follow her on Twitter at @ZoeKukla. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Phil Longo fired: What’s next for Wisconsin football? A breakdown of where the Badgers go from here after firing their offensive coordinator. By Josh Murphy November 23, 2024 | 4:56pm CST A day after Wisconsin suffered a 16-13 home loss against No. 1 Oregon on Nov. 16., head coach Luke Fickell relieved offensive coordinator Phil Longo of his duties. Fickell thanked Longo for his time with the team during his weekly press conference on Monday. Wisconsin’s offense has struggled all season, especially in the second half of games. The Nov. 16 loss to Oregon was their third of the season against a ranked opponent where the Badgers led at halftime. One of the main issues fans had with Longo’s offense was his predictable playcalling, which is why Wisconsin’s offense had been so stagnant in the second half of games. Longo’s situational play calling has also been questionable at times, particularly on fourth-and-short situations. All too often the Badgers handed the ball off to running back Tawee Walker in the shotgun formation on fourth-and-1, which has received heavy criticism from former players and fans. When reporters asked who would replace Longo as the offensive play-caller going forward during Monday’s press conference, Fickell responded briefly. “Why does it matter?” he said. Fickell elaborated by saying he does not think having a single play-caller is that important, even going so far as to call it overrated at times. Instead, Wisconsin’s offense will be run by a “collaborative group” going forward. This is interesting for a number of reasons. First, many fans and analysts would argue that having an offensive play-caller is important, especially for a Badgers team that has struggled on that side of the football all season long. It is also very unconventional for a Division I offense to be run by a committee rather than a single play-caller. Fickell did not specify who this committee would consist of and how large this committee is, so it seems as though we will learn more about how this offense will be run when we see it in action on the field. The Badgers sit at 5-5 with two games left on the schedule, and they need to win just one of them to keep their bowl streak of 22 years alive. They play on the road against Nebraska this Saturday before closing out the 2024 regular season in Madison against Minnesota in the annual “Battle for Paul Bunyan’s Axe” game. These will be two tough games, and the Badgers will have to leave it all on the field to beat their rivals and clinch a bowl game. After the season ends, Wisconsin will inevitably have to find a replacement offensive coordinator. There have been a few names linked to the Badgers already, including Notre Dame offensive coordinator Mike Denbrock and Notre Dame quarterbacks coach Gino Guidugli. Both of them served on Fickell’s staff with the Cincinnati Bearcats from 2017 to 2021 and may be able to help better execute Fickell’s vision for the “Air Raid” offense at Wisconsin. These last two games will be important for Fickell and the Badgers. Fans will be outraged if Wisconsin suffers back-to-back defeats and loses their bowl streak, and Fickell could easily find himself on the hot seat for the 2025 season. Fickell’s offensive play calling committee will get its first test against a Nebraska defense that has been giving up 321.4 yards per game and 20.0 points per game this season. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Kickoff is at 2:30 p.m. on Saturday at Memorial Stadium in Lincoln, Nebraska. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball dominates in opening game at Goodman The Badgers took down in-state opponents in a convincing fashion at home. By Abby Shulman October 1, 2023 | 6:51pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers opened the 2023-24 season with a convincing 18-1 win over Bryant & Stratton College at Goodman Softball Complex. Catcher Emmy Wells set the stage for success against the Bryant & Stratton Bobcats with a home run in the first inning, bringing both Hilary Blomberg and Paige Miller home. The Badgers swarmed the field to congratulate their teammates. The Badgers ended the first inning leading 5-0 after Emily Bojan and Alivia Bark scored, with RBIs from Bojan and Skylar Sirdashney. Tessa Magnanimo pitched the first two innings, not allowing a single Bobcat on base in the bottom of the second. Similarly, Shelby Jacobson took over the mound and threw two perfect innings after her. She struck two batters out, and the fielders efficiently made the rest of the outs. Moving forward, the Badgers ended the fourth inning leading 6-0 after a single from infielder Fiona Girardot that brought Alivia Bark home after her triple. Pitcher Gabi Salo took over for the final three innings and made the bottom of the fifth incredibly quick, ensuring no Bobcat made it on base. On the offensive side, the Badgers ended the sixth inning up 12-0 thanks to Fiona Girardot’s home run that brought in Ava Kuszak and Kate Linkletter. Molly Schlosser, Rylie Crane and pinch runner Marytherese Nevin also scored, with RBIs from Schlosser and Blomberg. The game just kept getting better for the Badgers. Linkletter and Giradot hit home runs, making this Giradot’s second home run of the game, and Bark scored her third run of the game in the final inning. The score was a lopsided 18-0 by the middle of the inning. The game ended 18-1 after the Bobcats’ centerfielder scored a run late in the game. All in all, this was a dominant outing for the Badgers. The Badgers will look to continue their strong start when they host the University of Minnesota Duluth on Oct. 8 at Goodman Diamond. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Alders introduce resolution to censure Ald. Charles Myadze following sexual harassment investigation District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan heads the initiative to censure District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze following a sexual harassment investigation that found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze guilty. By Marin Rosen November 20, 2024 | 6:13pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan, alongside eight members of the Madison Common Council and Mayor Satya-Rhodes Conway, introduced a resolution Wednesday to censure District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze following a sexual harassment investigation. The investigation found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze broke state law despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them. One of the women was District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett, who said in a statement Thursday Myadze “persisted and refused” to respect her boundaries on multiple occasions and threatened her after seeking guidance on the situation. The initial investigation into Myadze conducted Aug. 9 found sufficient evidence of workplace hostility and harassment, but was recently revised after Myadze’s attorney requested the case be reopened. “The City should be a safe work environment,” Govindarajan said in a Wednesday post on X. “The patterns of unethical behavior we've seen are unbecoming of an alder, and Myadze should resign immediately.” The incident did not qualify as workplace harassment because Myadze’s behavior did not disrupt the women’s ability to perform their jobs, according to the investigation. While a censure will not remove Myadze from the Common Council or committees, Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal he moved to censure because “it is the right thing to do.” “When the Common Council gets together, and if they vote in favor of this, they are saying we disapprove of it,” Govindarajan said. “It is not what an alder should be doing. It is inappropriate.” Bennett, District 5 Ald. Regina Vidaver, District 3 Ald. Derek Field, District 16 Ald. Jael Currie, District 17 Ald. Sabrina V. Madison, District 6 Ald. Marsha A. Rummel, District 4 Ald. Michael Verveer, Council President Yannette Figueroa Cole and Rhodes-Conway sponsored the resolution. Bennett previously told the Cardinal that legal reform is in order because women in these situations are often conditioned to “keep the peace” and remain cordial during abuse. Because independent elected officials, such as alders, are not under the same jurisdiction as city employees, the city cannot hold alders to the same standards as city employees, according to a statement from Rhodes-Conway. “If the same behaviors that Ald. Myadze engaged in was done by a [city] department head, that person likely would face anything from a simple warning to termination,” Govindarajan said. “But because of the fact that this conduct was conducted by an alder, there's no real way to hold that person accountable other than censuring them.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Govindarajan told the Cardinal he believes the best thing for Myadze to do is resign immediately. “Let’s take any constituents, and hypothetically they have experienced sexual harassment or domestic violence,” Govindarajan said. “How are they going to reach out to their alderperson if that alderperson is known to be sexually harassing folks? That is a disservice that Charles Myadze is doing to his own constituents.” The resolution will be formally introduced at the council meeting Nov. 26 and voted on Dec. 10, according to Govindarajan. Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Liam Beran | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW System updates information security policy The updated University of Wisconsin System policy framework, which went into effect Sunday, establishes categories assessing the importance and risk of UW System data to system schools By Mar McKenna December 2, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin System’s updated policy on data classification went into effect Sunday, establishing a framework for classifying the “sensitivity, value, and criticality” of UW System data to system schools. The policy assesses UW System data using three tiers ranging from lowest to highest risk. These data classifications are “necessary to secure and protect” data, the policy said. The policy, which UW System President Jay Rothman approved on Dec. 1, 2023, is an updated version of a policy issued in 2016. The policy applies to all UW System data, and it allows for individual system schools to develop their own policies if they comply. UW-Madison most recently updated its institutional data policy on Nov. 14, 2023, outlining the requirements for the management of institutional data resources, which the university called a “shared university resource.” The UW-Madison Division for Teaching and Learning also began educating staff on AI and provided public resources regarding AI starting last year, Vice Provost of Learning and Teaching John Zumbrunnen told The Daily Cardinal. “In Summer 2023, we brought together cross-disciplinary teams including faculty, instructional academic staff, academic technologists and student affairs specialists to take stock of the current landscape and develop frameworks, principles, resources and recommendations around generative AI in teaching and learning,” Zumbrunnen said. Current UW-Madison policy limits entering protected data like Wiscard and health information into AI tools without approval, but many decisions on academic AI usage are left up to individual departments and professors. Policy also states instructors should refrain from using AI detection tools, which the policy said are often inaccurate and biased against people whose first language is not English. With these new policies, Zumbrunnen encouraged students to follow instructors’ expectations regarding AI, understand that using AI can share information with the rest of the internet and cite AI if instructors allow its use. Zumbrunnen also encouraged professors to reflect on the benefits and drawbacks of AI and communicate clear expectations with their students. Zumbrunnen believes AI can enhance education, though he cautioned it can be used in a positive and negative way. He compared AI to other forms of technology such as calculators. “Using a calculator may go against our expectations for academic integrity [in some classes], but in other classes or for other assignments, a calculator may be an important learning tool. The same, in a general way, is true of AI,” Zumbrunnen said. He said he was confident the current policy balanced the power of technology and the human mind, though he said students and faculty need to be aware of AI’s limitations. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “All of us — not just students, but all of us — need to be aware of the possibilities and challenges AI brings. This will allow us to engage critically with an information environment in which AI will be an enduring presence,” Zumbrunnen said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mar McKennaMar McKenna is a writer for the Features desk and College News. They are a Philosophy major and a published author. Follow them on Instagram @marmck_writing. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
President Joe Biden spoke to a crowd of hundreds Wednesday at a labor union training center. Photo by MK Denton | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS President Joe Biden shares ‘blue-collar blueprint’ for U.S. economy during Madison area visit Biden promised to rebuild America’s “hollowed out” middle class and bolster union job growth with infrastructure projects a day after delivering his State of the Union address. By Tyler Katzenberger February 8, 2023 | 7:07pm CST DEFOREST, Wis. — President Joe Biden praised labor unions and touted his economic agenda Wednesday in a speech to hundreds of workers at a labor training center near Madison. Biden’s appearance at the Laborers’ International Union of North America (LiUNA) in DeForest was his first public engagement since delivering his State of the Union address to a divided U.S. Congress Tuesday night, where he promised an economy built “from the bottom up and the middle out.” The president reiterated his “blue-collar blueprint” to rebuild U.S. infrastructure with union jobs and promised to repair a “hollowed out” middle class in a 25-minute speech Wednesday. “Wall Street did not build this country,” Biden said. “The middle class built the country, and unions built the middle class.” Gov. Tony Evers, Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway, U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan, University of Wisconsin-Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin and District 8 Ald. Juliana Bennett were in attendance as Biden touted Wisconsin infrastructure projects funded by legislation passed during his first two years in office. Those projects include replacing a pair of freeway bridges over the Wisconsin River in Columbia County, port facility upgrades in Racine and Green Bay, and 46 electric buses purchased for Madison’s forthcoming East-West bus rapid transit line, which broke ground in December, according to the Cap Times. “It’s all happening due to the president’s leadership and partnership,” Rhodes-Conway told the crowd before Biden spoke. MK Denton Biden also said he plans to stimulate U.S. manufacturing by introducing requirements for federal construction projects to use American-made materials. “My economic plan is about investing in people [and] places that have been forgotten,” Biden said. “Where is it written America can’t lead the world in manufacturing again?” He referenced an employment report released Friday by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) that found the U.S. added 517,000 jobs as the unemployment rate fell to 3.4%, the lowest measure since 1969. “The Biden economy is working,” the president said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin’s unemployment rate currently sits below the national average at 3.2% after the state added 60,000 jobs last year, according to the latest data from the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development. Madison’s unemployment rate is 1.6% — the lowest of any metro area in the nation, per BLS data. Despite the positive jobs report, Wisconsin faces an impending worker shortage. The state is estimated to lose 130,000 residents of prime working age by 2030 as young people leave for states with warmer climates and lower income taxes, leaving employers without enough employees to replace retiring baby boomers. Meghan Spirito President Joe Biden exits Air Force One shortly after landing at Dane County Regional Airport on Wednesday, February 8, 2023. Campus community members, politicians react Biden’s speech Wednesday earned largely positive remarks from several UW-Madison students in attendance. Freshman Whitman Bottari felt Biden’s focus on non-college career options demonstrated a “deep respect” for trade workers in unions. “College isn’t an option for so many Americans,” Bottari said. UW-Madison College Democrats Chair Maggie Keuler was glad Biden chose to visit Wisconsin first after the State of the Union. “It was a really impactful way to show how his policies have had a real impact here,” she said. Keuler said a standout moment from Wednesday was when Biden pulled out past comments against Social Security and Medicare from Republican lawmakers, including Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson. Biden accused some Republicans of wanting to let Social Security and Medicare “sunset” out of existence during Tuesday’s State of the Union, drawing boos from Republicans in Congress. “They sure didn’t like me calling them on it,” Biden recounted Wednesday. Biden shouted out Wisconsin manufacturers that received over $4 billion in federal funding since he took office, according to the White House, including California-based genetic medicine company Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals. Missy Hughes, Secretary and CEO of the Wisconsin Economic Development Corporation, said she was “delighted” to hear President Biden recognize Arrowhead’s $220 million expansion into Verona. Arrowhead estimates the project will create over 200 new jobs, according to the Verona Press. MK Denton Two members of the Laborers’ International Union of North America (LIUNA) look on as President Joe Biden delivers a speech to a crowd of hundreds at a labor training center in DeForest, Wisconsin on Feb. 8, 2023. In response to Biden’s visit, Republican state party leaders said Biden did “nothing to improve his standing with Wisconsin voters.” “Wisconsin’s households and businesses have faced crushing inflation, decreasing real wages and increasing energy bills for months,” WisGOP Chair Brian Schimming said in a statement Wednesday. “Trying to buy voters with his inflationary spending and Green New Deal agenda isn’t the answer to helping Wisconsin families.” U.S. inflation steadily cooled from 9.1% to 6.5% during the second half of 2022, according to recent BLS data. However, the nation’s annual inflation rate remains more than three times higher than Federal Reserve recommendations, and gas prices remain over a dollar higher than when Biden first took office, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Wisconsin Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) retweeted a Schimming statement calling Biden’s speech a “traveling economic medicine show” that ignored inflation. Schimming referenced an Associated Press poll released Monday that found just 37% of Democratic respondents wanted Biden to seek a second term. As @POTUS Biden brings his traveling economic medicine show here today, Wisconsinites know reality vs his rhetoric. Latest natl polling shows only 37% of D's want him to run again, he will lose Wisconsin. @wisgop ⁦@wisconsin_now⁩ pic.twitter.com/WMRSKLJQoW— Brian Schimming (@BrianSchimming) February 8, 2023 Biden delivers State of the Union to divided Congress Biden’s visit comes a day after he delivered the annual State of the Union speech to lawmakers in U.S. Congress, which focused heavily on affordability, police reform and foreign relations. Foreshadowing his speech in DeForest, Biden promised to promote labor union rights and domestic manufacturing with an economic agenda that would continue reviving “once-thriving cities and towns” in middle America. “Amid the economic upheaval of the past four decades, too many people have been left behind or treated like they’re invisible,” Biden said. “That’s why we’re building an economy where no one is left behind.” Hope Karnopp Security fences surround the U.S. Capitol ahead of the State of the Union address on Feb. 7, 2023. Amid privacy concerns over TikTok and other social media apps, Biden also asked Congress to pass legislation imposing stricter limits on personal data collected by tech companies. “We must finally hold social media companies accountable for the experiment they are running on our children for profit,” Biden said. Gov. Tony Evers banned TikTok from state devices last month, citing security and privacy concerns. The ban includes devices owned by the University of Wisconsin System. Other policies Biden introduced or supported yesterday include: Raising the debt ceiling Eliminating credit card “junk fees” Capping insulin at $35 for all Americans Banning non-compete agreements Investigating fraud of COVID-19 relief funds Banning assault weapons Codifying Roe v. Wade Passing the Equality Act Biden will travel to Tampa, Florida on Thursday to speak about his plans for Medicare, Social Security and lowering healthcare costs. News manager Hope Karnopp contributed to this report from Washington, D.C. Editor's note: This article was updated at 8:26 p.m. to accurately reflect attribution for a tweet from Brian Schimming. The tweet was previously attributed to Robin Vos. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tyler KatzenbergerTyler Katzenberger is the former managing editor at The Daily Cardinal. He also served as the state news editor, covering numerous protests, elections, healthcare, business and in-depth stories. He previously interned with The Capital Times, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and is an incoming POLITICO California intern. Follow him on Twitter at @TylerKatzen. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
The WUD Society and Politics hosted discussion seemed only to hint at Kanye West’s impact in 2018, while most attendees were very comfortable defending his impact on the music industry as a whole. Photo by Photo Courtesy of Wikipedia | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ​We Need to Talk About Kanye By Carl Zabat November 14, 2018 | 10:22am CST Last Wednesday, the Society and Politics committee of the Wisconsin Union Directorate hosted a discussion titled “A Dark Twisted Fantasy? Kanye West in Recent News.” As someone who has listened to West’s music for years and has found deep discomfort in his actions throughout 2018, I was intrigued to see what exactly would be discussed at the event and what others’ opinions on the matters were. I attended the discussion with the intention of mostly being a fly on the wall, occasionally chipping in my two cents. With that in mind, I headed to Memorial Union and sat down in the Langdon Room with a free slice of pizza and a cup of water, joining 17 others, more or less. What I found was a room composed mostly of loyal Kanye fans and then everyone else. In the interest of preserving attendees’ privacy, no names will be mentioned. A representative from WUD Society & Politics began the evening with a recap on Kanye in 2018, including his TMZ appearance, his musical output and his meeting with President Trump in the Oval Office. He brought up numerous topics that stemmed from these incidents, including mental health and media bias, and then we entered the discussion. The dialogue centered around the notion of mixed messages and the general trickiness of addressing certain topics. One person thought that whatever message West had in mind could be different than what he delivered, solely due to a butchered execution. West’s donations to Uganda and philanthropy in Chicago were forgotten amidst the controversy of his politics, said one attendee. Another added that the Blexit movement — named for “Black exit” and spearheaded by Candance Owens — has not been given a chance and is a misunderstood campaign. The trickiest issue to address, however, was generally agreed upon to be mental health. West was committed to UCLA Medical Center in late 2016 and more recently opened up about mental health in his meeting with President Trump this past October. One attendee, who said she was not a fan of West’s music, said it is hard to address mental health due to the confusion around West’s personal mental health state. A large portion of the discussion was the quality and impact of West’s music. I knew this would take hold of the conversation at some point, as West’s music and his personality have always been nearly indistinguishable from one another for the entire duration of his career as a rapper. What was disappointing, though, was that the conversation took this turn and suddenly felt like an apologist’s discussion for a man that, for the most part, doesn’t even know how to apologize well. An attendee spoke on how West’s unabashed honesty in his music has led to a greater acceptance of non-gangsta-rap-related themes in contemporary hip-hop, such as Tyler, the Creator’s tracks on sexuality and BROCKHAMPTON’s openness about depression. This honesty eventually translated to West’s politics. Another attendee commented on how West’s tendency to go against the grain has worked for him before, but, since going against the grain in 2018 means supporting Trump, he is now poorly received compared to those defying gangsta rap or lambasting then-President George W. Bush on live television. Then, another attendee mentioned West’s recent apology tweets, which turned the conversation toward West’s most recent music. I chipped in that, while it is fascinating to see how an artist’s career arc reflects in their music, the release of the disappointing solo album ye showed how West’s scatterbrained appearance translated to his scatterbrained approach to recording records. Additionally, his new music and politics could change his base of fans. One attendee thought that ye should be viewed as a part of a greater context, while another responded that it’s important to put West’s whole career in perspective. A third said that West’s music hadn’t actually dipped in quality. After that, the member of WUD that presented on West’s recent happenings asked how we find ourselves defending West’s latest antics. One attendee said that they can’t take anything West says too literally. Another chipped in that the nature of the music industry and hip-hop in particular pressures West and other performers to innovate in order to stay pertinent, and 2018 was just another trail in West’s quest for relevance. The discussion ended with how to interpret West’s recent actions. A committee member who said she does not listen to West’s music stated that someone somewhere is taking his statements way too seriously, and addressed the importance of recognizing how much power West holds as a celebrity. Another individual said that the arts industry at large seemed to lean liberal, and that it is generally accepted when a celebrity endorses liberal politics rather than endorses conservative politics. A third person commented that there was nothing wrong in contributing to the conversation and that it is good to express yourself. By the time the night was wrapping up, the tone of the conversation seemed only to hint at Kanye West’s impact in 2018, while most were very comfortable defending his impact on the music industry as a whole. However, I implore readers that it is far easier for Kanye West fans to talk about West’s music in a positive light than to talk about West’s politics in a negative light; in a time where hate crimes have increased at a noticeable rate, it’s important to remember what West has normalized for intolerance. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email He has tried to brand “Make America Great Again” as a symbol of love when the slogan has been linked to racism and misogyny. He has engaged in conversations about history and politics with incorrect facts and excused slavery as a choice. His conversations about mental health seem to still be developing and have no clear start or end, and there’s nothing wrong with that. However, the damage from other conversations has already been inflicted. While West will always be the man who changed popular music, his connections to a changing political atmosphere and his misuse of his platform as a public figure may not serve well to his legacy. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
The front of Paul's Bookstore on December 3, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Students mourn as Paul’s Book Store closes after 70-year run The independent business announced it will close its doors early next year. By Mia Salbego December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Paul’s Book Store, a beloved fixture at 670 State St. known for its vintage charm and atmosphere, announced on Instagram on Nov. 28 that it will close in early 2025 after 70 years in business. The bookstore’s social media page posted a farewell statement on Thanksgiving, not specifying a reason for the closure but extending thanks to employees and customers. “It’s been an adventure and a labor of love,” read the caption. “And now it’s time to say goodbye.” The shop opened in 1954 by founder Paul Askins and was later taken over by his widow Caryl Askins following his passing in 1975, according to Channel3000. Despite her limited experience in the business of books, her stewardship helped establish the store as a cherished spot on State Street. A short distance from campus, the small, independent bookstore held a place in the hearts of many UW-Madison students. “It’s very different from a Barnes & Noble, it’s very mom-and-pop vibes,” said Avery Doemel, a UW-Madison junior. Doemel remembers the first time she noticed the shop, prior to her first semester at UW. “I was walking down State Street, and I noticed a really cute bookstore,” Doemel recalled. “I really liked the music that they played and how they used vinyls. It sets the mood and gives a whole new feel when you go inside.” Sarah Kissel, a UW class of 1994 alum and current attorney at the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, remembers buying books for her English literature classes at Paul’s Book Store during her time as a student. Kissel expressed disappointment but said she understood the business’s decision. “Part of the reason owning a bookstore is such a grind today is the obvious competition with Amazon,” said Kissel. “How do you compete with being able to open the computer that you keep in your pocket and, in under a minute, order something at a lesser price?” As a Madison community member and mother of a current UW student, Kissel hopes that whatever business moves in to fill the spot on State Street maintains the area’s charm. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I hope that whatever it is, it maintains the continuity of weirdness for State Street,” said Kissel, referring to the book store’s eclectic collection of books and other items. “I hope that it’s somebody new’s dream.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
The Aurora Borealis photographed on the night of October 9 from The Lakeshore Preservation path. Photo by Humza Pasha | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Northern lights illuminate Madison sky UW-Madison caught a rare viewing of the aurora borealis on Oct. 9 and 10. By Eiman Mir October 15, 2024 | 7:25pm CDT Madison witnessed a sightseeing northern light show on Oct. 9 and 10. The northern lights, or aurora borealis, are typically only visible near the polar regions. However, extreme solar activity can extend the viewing range south. While it is typical for only northern Wisconsin to see the lights, this year, the Madison area received a glimpse of the show as well. This year brings more solar activity since this year marks a time of peak activity in the sun’s 11-year cycle, bringing increases in electromagnetic activity. This can lead to solar flares, which NASA defines as an “intense burst of radiation coming from the release of magnetic energy associated with sunspots.” An increase in sunspots can lead to more coronal mass ejections, which are large eruptions of magnetized solar plasma. When directed toward the Earth's surface, the interaction between these energized particles and atmospheric gasses leads to the aurora borealis. Different gasses produce different colors. Last week, the northern lights were best seen on Thursday and Friday. Crowds gathered around Memorial Union, Observatory Hill and other spots on campus to capture photos of the view. Seeing the northern lights is difficult with the naked eye, but cameras are able to better capture the colors. Photos with a longer exposure time will be able to pick up the colors best. Opportunities to view aurora borealis are expected to come up throughout the 2024-25 winter season. The Space Weather Prediction Center updates their aurora borealis viewing prediction tool daily. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S SOCCER Women’s soccer heads to the NCAA Sweet 16 for the first time since 2021 Wisconsin beat Virginia 4-2 in penalty kicks, and will go on to face No.1 seed USC on Sunday. By Gabriella Hartlaub November 24, 2024 | 1:32pm CST The Wisconsin women’s soccer team beat the fourth seeded University of Virginia in penalty kicks on Friday to earn a spot in the the Sweet 16 of the 2024 NCAA Tournament for the first time since 2021. Despite logging no shots on goal, the Badgers took down Virginia in penalty kicks 4-2 after double overtime. In a game that will no doubt go down in program history as nothing short of miraculous, Wisconsin made every penalty kick that they attempted. Sophomore Ella Ottey made the final penalty kick to win the game. After 110 minutes of play, the score remained 0-0 due in no small part to Wisconsin goalkeeper Drew Stover, who had five saves for the game. It was Stover’s effort that saved the game for the Badgers as they struggled offensively against Virginia. If any of Virginia's five shots on goal went in, the Badgers’ season would’ve been done before overtime even started. It was also Stover who gave the Badgers the upper hand in the penalty kick shootout when she blocked Virginia's first shot attempt, which eventually led to Wisconsin’s win. Stover’s clean sheet was one of the only bright spots for a game in which the Badgers struggled offensively. Throughout the season, the Badgers have consistently outshot their opponents by large margins, but they struggled to get past the Virginia defense throughout the game, ending the game with six shots to Virginia's nine. For a team that has averaged 11.9 shots per game, to have only six shots is usually an insurmountable error, especially during tournament play. As the Badgers move on to face the No.1 seed USC, these kinds of errors will be certain death for the Badgers’ Elite Eight hopes. When Wisconsin and USC last met in September, the Badgers lost 0-3 in a game where they also had no shots on goal and USC had twice the amount of overall shots. While a victory in this game shows that miracles are possible, it will take nothing short of that to push the Badgers over USC and on to the Elite Eight. The Badgers play the Trojans Sunday Nov. 24 at 6 p.m. CST on ESPN+. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Dominion Resources Greentech Incubator/Flickr SCIENCE Dairyland Power Cooperative awarded $579 million to accelerate Wisconsin’s clean energy transition The U.S. Department of Agriculture with support from the Clean Energy Community initiative and UW-Madison College of Engineering, awarded Dairyland Power Cooperative $579 million for new renewable energy projects. By Rusal Ferus September 26, 2024 | 4:00am CDT Dairyland Power Cooperative, one of western Wisconsin’s largest energy providers, received $579 million from the Biden administration Sept. 5 to enhance wind and solar energy in rural Wisconsin. This funding is part of the new Empowering Rural America (ERA) grant, which will provide around $9.7 billion to major rural electrification groups throughout the United States. The award will enable the production of 1,020 megawatts of renewable energy and reduce pollution by approximately 3.3 million metric tons annually through eight total solar and wind projects across the four states the cooperative serves. The ERA program is part of the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act and is a large initiative from the Biden-Harris administration’s plan to improve rural economies through the construction of clean energy and climate infrastructure. It’s the largest investment in rural electrification since President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the Rural Electrification Act into law in 1936. New ERA will drive substantial carbon reduction across the Dairyland system, facilitate new economic growth and job creation, promote environmental stewardship and lower energy costs for rural and agricultural communities,” Dairyland Power Cooperative President and CEO Brent Ridge said in a statement. With this transition, Dairyland’s customers will see their electricity bills decrease by an estimated 42% over the next decade. Dairyland Power Cooperative, headquartered in LaCrosse, Wisconsin, is made up of 24 distribution cooperatives and 27 municipal utilities across Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois and Minnesota. The cooperative aims to diversify its energy sources — including wind, solar, natural gas, coal, hydro and biogas — to provide reliable energy to their customers. The Dairyland Power Cooperative has already cut its coal production by 579 megawatts since 2014 and will continue to cut down their coal investments with this funding, according to a press release. These projects aim to lower pollution and improve health for vulnerable populations, including children and people ages 65 and older, who are at high risk of respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses. Moving away from fossil fuel energy also aids in mitigating climate change stressors, like extreme weather and heat. The Clean Energy Community Initiative, a collaboration with the University of Wisconsin-Madison College of Engineering, Department of Life Science Communication and the Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, assisted Dairyland through the grant proposal process, focusing on community engagement, energy justice and job development. The initiative champions community engagement to accelerate the clean energy transition in Wisconsin. “We have created a partner network to support such large-scale clean-energy projects to aid in an equitable execution along community priorities and needs, and to leverage the projects for sustainable community benefits through career perspectives and the advantages of technology innovation,” Oliver Schmitz, director of the Grainger Institute for Engineering at UW-Madison, said in a statement. The Clean Energy Community Initiative will continue supporting Dairyland through establishing a farmer benefit and union engagement plan to facilitate engagement between the community and different stakeholders. “Renewable energy is the path forward. It immediately improves lives through cleaner air and more affordable bills, bringing prosperity and better health to rural Wisconsinites,” Abby Novinska-Lois, the executive director of Healthy Climate Wisconsin, said in a statement. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
From left to right, new-student leaders Selin Gok, Kennedie King and Justin Sparapani -- who are also members of the First Wave Hip Hop and Urban Arts Learning Community -- present an emotional performance based on themes of oppression and acceptance in front of a group of incoming first-year undergraduates during a Student Orientation, Advising and Registration (SOAR) session at Union South at the University of Wisconsin-Madison on June 20, 2016. Sponsored by the Center for the First-Year Experience, the two-day SOAR sessions provide new students and their parents and guests an opportunity to meet with staff and advisors, register for classes, stay in a residence hall, take a campus tour and learn about campus resources. (Photo by Jeff Miller/UW-Madison) Photo by Jeff Miller | and Jeff Miller The Daily Cardinal OPINION Dear class of 2029 applicants, we owe you an apology As a student body, we owe it to prospective students to fall back in love with the Wisconsin experience. By Blake Martin November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST On Nov. 1 at midnight, hopeful high school seniors across the U.S. submitted their early action applications to secure their spot as part of the University of Wisconsin-Madison's class of 2029. With admissions becoming increasingly competitive in recent years, over half will receive a rejection letter this upcoming spring, forcing some to move on from a future they’ve been imagining for years. Meanwhile, on campus, students in the face of a mid-semester slump find themselves going through the motions to get by — skipping classes, completing coursework at the last minute and retreating to their off-campus apartments whenever possible. With the stress of college admissions in the rearview mirror, enrolled students have started to take their place at UW-Madison for granted. As a student body, we owe it to hopeful future badgers to give falling back in love with UW-Madison another chance. Four years ago, getting accepted into UW-Madison was all I could think about. Every AP test, every hour I spent volunteering and every minute I spent studying for the ACT were all building towards the same goal: getting to where I am right now. As a current student, I’ll be the first to admit to you that it’s easy to forget just how badly I wanted the chance to attend an 8 a.m. lecture. Semesters pass, you start to adjust to life in college and one skipped lecture turns into a class you just...skip. I know what you’re probably thinking: “that’s just part of life in college.” While sliding down this slippery slope of “academic apathy” might be easy, it’s important to remember you’re hurting more than just yourself, you’re wasting an opportunity that would have belonged to someone else. The bottom line is, having access to higher education, here of all places, is a privilege, even if it feels more like a curse when midterm season becomes particularly overwhelming. Last year, over 63,000 high school students applied to UW-Madison’s admissions office. Of those applicants around 36,000 were rejected. From dripping with sweat in the early morning climbing Bascom Hill to the eleventh hour of an all-nighter in College Library — for some of those students, it was heartbreaking to part ways with even the parts of the Wisconsin experience most of us dread. So, what do we do now? If you haven’t already, start by making it a routine to go to class and try to do more than online shopping or the New York Times mini-crossword while you’re there. Next, get to know the material, and even better, your professors. Drop by office hours, talk to your TA and make sure you have a face they remember. Lastly, take your experience here one day at a time. I know it’s easy for school work to feel like a chore, for lectures to feel like an obstacle in your day and your week to feel like a countdown to your weekend. But if you want to have a Wisconsin experience to remember, you should cherish every Tuesday morning the same way you do a Friday night. Most importantly, when things get tough — don't forget, there was once a time when you wished to be where you are and have what you do. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Blake MartinBlake Martin is the opinions editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS As cities and schools turn to referendums to fill budget gaps, officials debate their effectiveness With several referendums on the Nov. 5 ballot, local leaders have mixed feelings about their effectiveness. By Vanessa Gavilan October 25, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Dane County has six referendums appearing on the Nov. 5 ballot, and voters must make the decision that is meant to give them a voice in funding and approving local policy. Of these six referendums, four ask voters to approve property tax increases in Madison, Monona, Fitchburg and the village of McFarland beyond what is otherwise allowed under the state’s levy limit. The other two would provide funding to the Madison Metropolitan School District (MMSD) for facility upgrades and staff wages. Madison depends heavily on property taxes to fund city operations — drawing over 70% of its annual revenue from the property tax levy — but state law caps the amount each municipality can increase taxes at around 2%. The additional 5% of property tax raises to cover city operations would need to come from a referendum in order to bypass the current limit.. FairVote, a nationwide nonpartisan organization focused on voting reforms, told The Daily Cardinal referendums like the ones proposed in Madison and other municipalities are very important to local communities. “[Referendums] empower voters, who can directly adopt reforms that improve their government and their lives,” said Deb Otis, the director of research and policy at FairVote. “When a dysfunctional government has stood in the way of policy desired by the majority of voters, ballot measures gave that majority a voice.” District 17 Ald. Sabrina Madison echoed Otis’s statement and said in a blog post “supporting the referendum is an investment in the future of our district.” But other voters believe referendums are an imperfect last resort to meet community needs, and though officials look to alleviate immediate budget gaps, the rising costs of services means municipalities and school districts may need to put referendums on the ballot again in the future. Insufficient shared revenue leaves referendums as ‘only vehicles’ to fund programs Whitman Bottari, communications director for the University of Wisconsin-Madison College Democrats, told the Cardinal local referendums “are the only vehicles we have at this point to fund vital programs.” Bottari cited the state’s Shared Revenue Program, now called the County and Municipal Aid Program, as one of the devices that caused Dane County to need a referendum to raise additional funds. The program distributes a portion of the state’s revenue to local governments using a loose formula that provides each county a valuation based on aidable revenue and per capita balances. The amount of shared revenue distributed to local governments steadily decreased from 2004 until the state boosted funding last year, and Madison has consistently received less per capita than the rest of the state. The state’s second-largest city collects just $29 per person in shared revenues compared to the statewide average of $195, according to a 2024 report from the Wisconsin Policy Forum, a nonpartisan policy research organization. District 10 Ald. Yannette Figueroa Cole said in a blog post a property tax referendum “would not be necessary if Madison simply received the average rate of shared revenue.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Figueroa Cole added Madison’s referendum to raise property taxes would not need to be imposed on voters if the city could raise taxes elsewhere. The city is not authorized to raise a local sales tax. MMSD blames state shortcomings These structural issues extend to the MMSD referendums. Edell Fiedel, senior director of communications for MMSD, told the Cardinal revenue gaps only occur because state legislation does not adequately support the district. Fiedel said MMSD has a revenue gap of $30.2 million for 2023-2025 due to the fact that “support from the state — which is holding billions of taxpayer dollars in reserve — did not keep pace with inflation.” These problems of support extend beyond the city of Madison. More than 120 Wisconsin school districts have placed referendums on the Nov. 5 ballot to receive help with operating expenses and facilities improvements, according to Fiedel. The Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) federal fund, which provided funds to school districts across the nation during the pandemic, expired last month, putting more financial pressure on districts. While lawmakers have added almost $1 billion in funding for education to the state budget, districts still fall short of the adequate funding, Fiedel said. “If our legislators were more committed to investing in the outcomes of Wisconsin students, districts like ours wouldn't continually need to rely so heavily on taxpayer dollars to operate and modernize,” Fiedel said. Both the city and MMSD said the community could potentially expect further referendums down the line if changes aren’t made to policy. “Without changes to current legislation that translate to increased state-level support for public education, districts across Wisconsin, including ours, will have to continue to rely on taxpayer support to undertake large-scale capital improvement projects and make necessary investments in current and future generations of students,” MMSD said on their website. The Office of the Mayor said in a press release that the current referendum will balance the budget until 2030 but that additional special charges could be implemented starting in 2027 for future budget gaps. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
CITY NEWS Comedian Charlie Berens to visit Madison to mobilize voters “Cripescast” podcast host Charlie Berens will team up with University of Wisconsin-Madison journalism professor Mike Wagner at Comedy on State weeks before the 2024 presidential election to mobilize voters and break down key ballot issues. By Jake Piper October 16, 2024 | 2:00am CDT “Cripescast” podcast host Charlie Berens will team up with University of Wisconsin-Madison journalism professor Mike Wagner in a sold-out event to highlight the importance of voting this November and break down key ballot issues. Berens will host a live episode of “Cripescast,” which focuses on the unique nature of the Midwest, at Comedy on State on Oct. 22. He will be joined by Wagner, who will break down key ballot issues while Berens offers witty Midwestern-based humor. Berens, a comedian, journalist, New York Times bestselling author has been an ever-present figure in Wisconsin pop culture since his rise to popularity in 2017 after launching a YouTube series. Known as the “Manitowoc Minute,” the series is a short comedy sketch playing on classic Midwestern stereotypes such as the love of beer, “Midwestern goodbyes” and thick accents. With Wisconsin positioned as a key swing state in the upcoming presidential election, both sides of the political spectrum have encouraged residents to vote. In 2020, 27% of Wisconsin’s registered voters chose not to vote, according to the Wisconsin Elections Commission, leaving a margin for both major-party candidates to secure the votes needed to win Wisconsin. Berens has advocated for voting as long as he’s been running the Manitowoc Minute. He is an alumnus of UW-Madison and served as the university’s winter commencement speaker in 2022. Wagner has extensive experience covering and researching the political climate, and has worked as a journalist, political author and political campaign manager before becoming a tenured professor at UW-Madison. The event will be presented by Civic Media’s local radio station 92.7 WMDX. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal OPINION The economic lie: We’ve been hijacked to believing Republicans are better for the country It’s time to reject the Reagan-era dogma of trickle-down economics and stop treating it as a permanent feature of American life. By Owen Puckett October 3, 2024 | 4:00am CDT It’s a common refrain in American politics: Republicans bring economic growth, while Democrats burden the economy with taxes, regulation and spending. This narrative has been reinforced for decades, ultimately shaping elections and voter perceptions. But when we look at the data, this belief doesn’t reflect reality. In fact, by most economic measures — GDP growth, job creation and stock market performance — the Democratic Party has historically outperformed the Republicans. So why, despite decades of evidence to the contrary, do so many Americans still believe Republicans are better for the economy? At the core of the Republican economic narrative is a simple and appealing formula: lower taxes and deregulation will lead to more growth. In theory, this approach sounds logical. If businesses keep more of their profits, they’ll invest more, hire more workers and stimulate the economy. This is the essence of “supply-side” or “trickle-down” economics, a theory that gained prominence during the Reagan years and has dominated Republican economic thinking ever since. Part of the appeal of this Republican economic policy lies in its immediate impact. Tax cuts provide instant gratification. You feel it in your paycheck almost immediately. Corporations report higher profits, and the stock market often rises on the news of corporate tax reductions. These are tangible, short-term wins that create the perception of economic growth. In practice, Republican administrations have presided over the start of the last five recessions. Reagan’s tax cuts combined with a significant increase in defense spending tripled the national debt during his presidency. George W. Bush turned the Clinton-era surplus into a massive deficit through tax cuts and wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Trump administration’s 2017 tax overhaul promised that corporate tax cuts would spark a wave of new investment and wage growth. Instead, it will cost $1.9 trillion over the next 10 years and more than triple the total value of tax cuts received by the top 1-5% of households than those with incomes in the bottom 60%. Though in theory tax cuts for the wealthy and corporations should provide long-term boosts, this has repeatedly failed in practice. As a result of cuts, the federal deficit typically expands, and the benefits of these cuts disproportionately go to the wealthiest individuals and largest corporations. According to a 2012 study by the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service, there is no significant correlation between lower tax rates on the wealthy and economic growth. Meanwhile, despite being branded as “tax-and-spend” liberals, Democratic administrations have often presided over more balanced and inclusive growth. Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal played a crucial role in pulling the country out of the Great Depression. Bill Clinton left office with a budget surplus following years of rapid economic expansion. Barack Obama inherited the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression and led the country through a sustained recovery that saw 75 consecutive months of job growth along with a significant reduction in the deficit. The evidence is undeniable: Democratic policies have generally been better for the broader economy – particularly for the middle and working-class Americans – tending to focus on policies that promote shared prosperity, from expanding access to education and healthcare to raising the minimum wage and protecting labor rights. Take the Obama administration’s investment in clean energy, health care and education through the 2009 stimulus package. Critics argued the stimulus didn’t do enough to immediately revive the economy, but these investments laid the groundwork for long-term growth, particularly in sectors that are now central to the U.S. economy. The persistence of the Republican economic myth is also fueled by the media ecosystem, particularly the conservative media. Right-wing media outlets like Fox news paint Democratic policies, particularly any form of government intervention or regulation, as inherently anti-business and damaging to growth. This selective storytelling reinforces the idea that the Republican economic policies are superior, even when the data tells a different story. Under Obama, for instance, the stock market more than doubled, unemployment plummeted, and the economy added millions of jobs. Yet conservative media consistently portrayed his policies as hostile to business and responsible for “slow” recovery. In contrast, during the Trump administration, even as deficits soared and the economy grew slower than under Obama, the narrative was that Trump’s policies were creating a “historic” economic boom. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email America didn’t always have an economy so skewed in favor of the rich. In fact, for much of the 20th century, the U.S. prospered under a tax structure that seems unimaginable today. During the postwar economic boom, top marginal tax rates reached over 90%, and yet this was a period of remarkable prosperity. The American middle class thrived, wages grew and the country built some of its most crucial infrastructure, from the interstate highway system to public universities. By gutting the progressive tax system, Reagan shifted the burden onto the middle and working classes, entrenching a trickle-down ideology that has left us with rampant inequality and increased national debt. And yet, the wealthy and corporations sold this model to the public as the only path to prosperity. They hijacked the narrative and branded high taxes and government intervention as “un-American” despite the fact that these very tools had built the most prosperous and equitable economy the country had ever known. This isn’t just a matter of failed policy — it’s a systemic campaign of corporate greed and manipulation. With their endless lobbying and political donations, corporations have convinced generations of Americans that reducing their taxes will somehow benefit the entire country, despite all evidence to the contrary. They’ve weaponized a false sense of economic freedom, framing any attempt to rein in corporate excess as a threat to individual liberty. The result is an economy that benefits the few at the expense of the many, with stagnant wages, weakened labor power and crumbling public infrastructure. But we must remember that these Republican policies are not a permanent feature of the American economy. They are not inevitable. We’ve been here before, and we know that the economy is not built on tax cuts and corporate profits alone. It thrives when there is real investment in people, when policies ensure that prosperity is shared across all income levels, and when the government plays an active role in balancing growth with fairness. These ideas, now framed as “radical” by Republicans, are rooted in the very policies that built America’s middle class. It’s time to reject the Reagan-era dogma of trickle-down economics and stop treating it as a permanent feature of American life. It was always a policy designed to serve the few at the expense of the many, and it always will be. It’s time we reclaim the tools that once built a fairer, more prosperous America. The future of the economy, and the well-being of millions of Americans, depends on it. The data, after all, speaks for itself. Owen Puckett is a senior studying political science. Do you agree that the Democratic party is better for the economy? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Dominion Resources Greentech Incubator/Flickr SCIENCE Dairyland Power Cooperative awarded $579 million to accelerate Wisconsin’s clean energy transition The U.S. Department of Agriculture with support from the Clean Energy Community initiative and UW-Madison College of Engineering, awarded Dairyland Power Cooperative $579 million for new renewable energy projects. By Rusal Ferus September 26, 2024 | 4:00am CDT Dairyland Power Cooperative, one of western Wisconsin’s largest energy providers, received $579 million from the Biden administration Sept. 5 to enhance wind and solar energy in rural Wisconsin. This funding is part of the new Empowering Rural America (ERA) grant, which will provide around $9.7 billion to major rural electrification groups throughout the United States. The award will enable the production of 1,020 megawatts of renewable energy and reduce pollution by approximately 3.3 million metric tons annually through eight total solar and wind projects across the four states the cooperative serves. The ERA program is part of the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act and is a large initiative from the Biden-Harris administration’s plan to improve rural economies through the construction of clean energy and climate infrastructure. It’s the largest investment in rural electrification since President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the Rural Electrification Act into law in 1936. New ERA will drive substantial carbon reduction across the Dairyland system, facilitate new economic growth and job creation, promote environmental stewardship and lower energy costs for rural and agricultural communities,” Dairyland Power Cooperative President and CEO Brent Ridge said in a statement. With this transition, Dairyland’s customers will see their electricity bills decrease by an estimated 42% over the next decade. Dairyland Power Cooperative, headquartered in LaCrosse, Wisconsin, is made up of 24 distribution cooperatives and 27 municipal utilities across Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois and Minnesota. The cooperative aims to diversify its energy sources — including wind, solar, natural gas, coal, hydro and biogas — to provide reliable energy to their customers. The Dairyland Power Cooperative has already cut its coal production by 579 megawatts since 2014 and will continue to cut down their coal investments with this funding, according to a press release. These projects aim to lower pollution and improve health for vulnerable populations, including children and people ages 65 and older, who are at high risk of respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses. Moving away from fossil fuel energy also aids in mitigating climate change stressors, like extreme weather and heat. The Clean Energy Community Initiative, a collaboration with the University of Wisconsin-Madison College of Engineering, Department of Life Science Communication and the Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, assisted Dairyland through the grant proposal process, focusing on community engagement, energy justice and job development. The initiative champions community engagement to accelerate the clean energy transition in Wisconsin. “We have created a partner network to support such large-scale clean-energy projects to aid in an equitable execution along community priorities and needs, and to leverage the projects for sustainable community benefits through career perspectives and the advantages of technology innovation,” Oliver Schmitz, director of the Grainger Institute for Engineering at UW-Madison, said in a statement. The Clean Energy Community Initiative will continue supporting Dairyland through establishing a farmer benefit and union engagement plan to facilitate engagement between the community and different stakeholders. “Renewable energy is the path forward. It immediately improves lives through cleaner air and more affordable bills, bringing prosperity and better health to rural Wisconsinites,” Abby Novinska-Lois, the executive director of Healthy Climate Wisconsin, said in a statement. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Students vote in the general election on November 5, 2024. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Voter noncitizen referendum will have little effect in Wisconsin, but restricts suffrage expansion The statewide referendum, approved by voters on Nov. 5, changes the language in a section of the state constitution to clarify that only U.S. citizens may vote in Wisconsin elections. By Zoey Elwood November 15, 2024 | 9:09am CST Wisconsin voters approved a statewide referendum question to change the state constitution’s language regarding voting in Wisconsin’s elections. About 70% voted yes to change “every United States citizen age 18 or older” may vote to “only a United States citizen age 18 or older” may vote. This policy, proposed by Wisconsin Republicans, aims to prevent Wisconsin noncitizens from voting in the future and clarify that the law applies to all elections and referendums, whether local, state or national. Democrats and suffrage groups have criticized the referendum’s wording for being exclusionary. Molly Carmichael, the communications manager for the nonpartisan League of Women Voters of Wisconsin, told The Daily Cardinal the original wording of the state constitution “was more inclusive of all eligible voters, and now the language is more exclusive.” “We felt that this was harmful for voting rights,” Carmichael said. “It could create barriers down the line.” Americans for Citizen Voting, an organization that aims to prevent noncitizens from voting in local elections, led the national effort to promote this referendum. Without the specificity of “only U.S. citizens can vote” in a state’s constitution, the possibility of noncitizens voting legally exists, according to Americans for Citizen Voting. Federal law prevents noncitizens from voting in federal elections, but cities in some states allow noncitizens to vote locally for races such as school boards. Nowhere in Wisconsin permits noncitizen voting in local elections. As a result, the amendment will have little immediate effect in the state. “I think the people who wanted this to pass did it in part because they wanted to restrict municipalities from controlling their own elections when it comes to expanding suffrage,” Carmichael said. “With over 1,800 municipalities across the state, it kind of took away the ability for municipalities to expand who might be able to vote.” This marks the fifth time this year that voters were asked whether the constitution should be amended. In April, Wisconsin voters approved the first two provisions to prohibit private funding for election administration and to limit who administers elections. However, in August, voters rejected two provisions that would require legislative approval for state expenditures of federal funds and prohibit the Legislature from delegating its power to determine how to spend certain federal funds. Carmichael said the referendum was worded in a way that confused voters and the implications were ambiguous. It could also lead to assumptions that noncitizens are commonly committing fraud in elections, which is not the case, she said. “If we think it's something that will create more barriers, that's harmful to voters, that could disenfranchise people, we’re always going to take a stand against it,” Carmichael said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Constrained by state law, Wisconsin cities struggle to raise enough money From limits on property tax increases to a near-statewide ban on local sales taxes, municipalities in Wisconsin have few options to bring in more revenue as service costs rise. By Joseph Panzer October 24, 2024 | 3:00am CDT As inflation has driven up the cost of services, Wisconsin’s local governments, including the city of Madison, find themselves constrained by state laws limiting how they can raise money. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal that current state budgets and tax laws dating back to former Gov. Scott Walker’s administration have made it harder for Madison to provide residents with essential services. “[City employees] haven’t always gotten the pay increases relative to inflation that they have deserved,” Govindarajan said. “The city has grown quite a lot since 2012, but we’re still at the same levels of service for trash collection, for example.” Despite these constraints, Govindarajan and other officials stressed that city leaders have not given up in their pursuit of increased benefits for Madison residents. GOP-controlled Legislature strikes down budgetary proposals Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway held a press conference Oct. 3 at the Madison Public Library with state lawmakers to demand greater funding for Dane County cities. Gov. Tony Evers’ 2023-25 budget proposal included a shared revenue distribution that would make the state give to municipalities a minimum of 95% of what they gave the previous year. Additionally, the proposal included a 5% increase in state payments for municipal services like police, waste disposal and utilities and a 4% increase in general transportation aids for both counties and municipalities. But the biennial budget passed by the Legislature did not include these increases in funding for shared revenue, leaving Dane County cities underfunded. This is a result of 2023 Act 12, which initially intended to give all municipalities more funding but has created a disparity between Madison and the rest of the state. City Communications Manager Dylan Brogan told the Cardinal Act 12 has changed “very little” in what Madison can achieve through state funds despite the fact that Madison has added 90,000 residents since 2000 and is the fastest-growing city in the state. “That’s a lot more people paying state sales and income tax — a portion of which is supposed to help fund local governments,” Brogan said. “In 2024, Madison receives just $29 per resident through the shared revenue program. The average for Wisconsin cities is $195.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One particular impact of the shared revenue overhaul is that underfunded communities can begin to see cuts in the availability of important services, such as fire departments. Another impact of shared revenue decreasing is that it becomes harder for governments to hire public defenders and district attorneys at competitive salaries, according to Wisconsin Public Radio. This leads to a growing number of backlogged cases accumulating in the court system. Evers had previously pushed for a raise for public defenders and assistant DAs in his budget proposal before Republicans cut it. Raising revenues in municipalities is often difficult Beyond shared revenue from the state, a large part of Madison’s budget is funded by levying taxes. An estimated 71% of the city’s annual revenue comes through property taxes. “How the state government expects local governments to fund themselves is through the property tax,” Govindarajan said. “If local municipalities want to raise their budget, they are basically forced to ask taxpayers to increase their own taxes in order to pay for city services.” Wisconsin used to rely heavily on income and property taxes as a part of its revenue stream until the election of Walker in 2010 signaled a shift to fiscal conservatism and tax cuts. The cuts amounted to a 4.4% per capita reduction and created negative externalities for cities. “Walker basically cut aid to local governments and then also their ability to raise revenue,” Brogan said. “You used to be able to raise property taxes based on inflation and net new construction. Well, he took off the inflation part.” The Legislature’s budget-writing committee’s May 2011 legislation on property tax levy limits changed the minimum levy increase for inflation from 3% to 0%, prohibiting municipalities from increasing their base levies by more than one percentage that exceeded the local government’s total value of all taxable property. While the introduction of levy limits was a response to a then-contemporary growth in municipal tax rates, the loss of these minimum limits on levies has led to low-growth municipalities being unable to keep pace with inflation, according to the Wisconsin Policy Forum, a nonpartisan policy research organization. Brogan underscored the city of Monona’s Nov. 5 referendum on instituting a one-time $3 million increase to its property tax levy as an example of a city struggling to keep up with costs. The 2024 Wisconsin Department of Revenue report found that Monona’s levy limit is only 0.45%. “How in the world are they going to be able to keep up with those costs when their ability to raise the property tax levy can never keep up?” Brogan said. “That’s something that hopefully the state Legislature is going to be addressing at some point, and that just is the tip of the iceberg of the revenue restrictions.” In his 2023-25 budget proposal, Evers suggested allowing municipalities greater privilege with selecting their own sales tax — known as the local option sales tax — giving Milwaukee County the ability to impose an additional 1% and other counties an additional 0.5% to their base. But the budget passed does not contain these measures. Rhodes-Conway named a local sales tax option as one of the items that would help Dane County communities secure the funds necessary to avoid cutting services during her Oct. 3 press conference. Partisan divides and next steps for cities When the biennial budget passed in 2023, Democrats unilaterally objected to it with no party members voting in support. One provision that Democrats took issue with was the institution of a tax cut when the state was in possession of a $7 billion budget surplus. “Republicans have been in charge of the Legislature for 14 years now,” Brogan told the Cardinal. “Gov. Evers has proposed budgets that treat cities like Madison a lot better, but the Republicans just ripped that up and passed their own budget.” To combat a budget shortfall, the Nov. 5 election in Madison will feature a $22 million funding referendum on the ballot to increase the city’s property tax levy above state levels. “We specifically came up with that number because that’s what it takes for us to continue our services,” Govindarajan said. “If the referendum passes, we’re not adding anything new. If we do not get that $22 million, we have to cut services.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Students vote in the general election on November 5, 2024. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Voter noncitizen referendum will have little effect in Wisconsin, but restricts suffrage expansion The statewide referendum, approved by voters on Nov. 5, changes the language in a section of the state constitution to clarify that only U.S. citizens may vote in Wisconsin elections. By Zoey Elwood November 15, 2024 | 9:09am CST Wisconsin voters approved a statewide referendum question to change the state constitution’s language regarding voting in Wisconsin’s elections. About 70% voted yes to change “every United States citizen age 18 or older” may vote to “only a United States citizen age 18 or older” may vote. This policy, proposed by Wisconsin Republicans, aims to prevent Wisconsin noncitizens from voting in the future and clarify that the law applies to all elections and referendums, whether local, state or national. Democrats and suffrage groups have criticized the referendum’s wording for being exclusionary. Molly Carmichael, the communications manager for the nonpartisan League of Women Voters of Wisconsin, told The Daily Cardinal the original wording of the state constitution “was more inclusive of all eligible voters, and now the language is more exclusive.” “We felt that this was harmful for voting rights,” Carmichael said. “It could create barriers down the line.” Americans for Citizen Voting, an organization that aims to prevent noncitizens from voting in local elections, led the national effort to promote this referendum. Without the specificity of “only U.S. citizens can vote” in a state’s constitution, the possibility of noncitizens voting legally exists, according to Americans for Citizen Voting. Federal law prevents noncitizens from voting in federal elections, but cities in some states allow noncitizens to vote locally for races such as school boards. Nowhere in Wisconsin permits noncitizen voting in local elections. As a result, the amendment will have little immediate effect in the state. “I think the people who wanted this to pass did it in part because they wanted to restrict municipalities from controlling their own elections when it comes to expanding suffrage,” Carmichael said. “With over 1,800 municipalities across the state, it kind of took away the ability for municipalities to expand who might be able to vote.” This marks the fifth time this year that voters were asked whether the constitution should be amended. In April, Wisconsin voters approved the first two provisions to prohibit private funding for election administration and to limit who administers elections. However, in August, voters rejected two provisions that would require legislative approval for state expenditures of federal funds and prohibit the Legislature from delegating its power to determine how to spend certain federal funds. Carmichael said the referendum was worded in a way that confused voters and the implications were ambiguous. It could also lead to assumptions that noncitizens are commonly committing fraud in elections, which is not the case, she said. “If we think it's something that will create more barriers, that's harmful to voters, that could disenfranchise people, we’re always going to take a stand against it,” Carmichael said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of Pinchofhealth/Flickr SCIENCE UW-Madison genetic scientists sound alarm on AI overreliance, say there are persistent flaws in data Researchers in the Genetics-Biotechnology Center at UW-Madison published a study in September, raising concerns over issues found in AI-assisted genome-wide association studies and offer new statistical methods for improvement. By Marco Lama November 21, 2024 | 3:00am CST Researchers in the Genetics-Biotechnology Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, led by associate professor Qiongshi Lu, published a study Sept. 30 in Nature Genetics raising concerns over persistent problems found in artificial intelligence-assisted genome-wide association studies. Broadly, genome-wide association studies search for links between genetic variation and health traits. This process requires large amounts of genetic and health related data, which come from “biobanks” that collect and store biological data. Based on links found in these datasets, scientists can predict future health risks for people with certain genetic traits. But attempting to predict certain health risks is challenging. “Some outcomes are very easy to measure. If you want to study the genetics of height, it’s easy to measure everyone’s height and DNA and just link them to identify associations. But if you want to study, say, Alzheimer’s, it gets tricky,” Lu said. Collecting and studying the traits of diseases like Alzheimer’s in large numbers is difficult because there isn’t enough prevalence in the datasets. This is mostly because collecting this type of data is extremely resource intensive. Without enough data, researchers don’t have the statistical power to make health-risk predictions. As a result, it has become popular in recent years to leverage AI tools, which can infer unknown traits based on proxy data. This allows scientists to work around the challenge of missing data by assigning traits to individuals in whom that trait has not been actually observed. But Lu said the inferences don’t account for their own uncertainty. Jiacheng Miao, a Ph.D. student in the Biomedical Data Science Program at UW-Madison and co-author of the study published in Nature Genetics, told The Daily Cardinal many scientists “are pretending that outcomes produced by AI are the gold standard, but we show that this is actually a pretty bad idea.” “For example, we have hospital-recorded diabetes statuses of individuals. So we created an AI predicted diabetes status to compare the results, and we found that they differ a lot,” he said. Further comparisons revealed persistent flaws in traits produced by AI. In response to these findings, Lu’s team developed a new statistical framework to improve the quality of AI inferences. While the results have been well-received within the field of genome research, they have not yet been widely implemented since Lu and his colleagues are some of the first to advance this discussion in genome-wide association studies, Lu said. Impacts The results of genome research are often used in developing therapeutic drugs. However, it’s possible that without the right statistical frameworks in place, these drugs will be developed based on contaminated data. While drugs built on false data would likely not make it past testing stages, Lu said developing those ineffective treatments “is a huge waste of resources.” “You could spend 10 years focusing on a therapeutic intervention strategy just to realize it’s false,” Lu said. “We need frontier methodology to guard people against spurious findings, so that we can really efficiently advance the field of medical sciences.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marco LamaMarco is a features writer for The Daily Cardinal. He is an English and History major and has experience covering local businesses. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Molly Sheehan | The Daily Cardinal SPORTS Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights With the year coming to an end, it’s time to look at some moments that defined Wisconsin Badgers athletics. By Yadi Chavez December 8, 2024 | 2:36pm CST December marks a transitional period of sorts when it comes to collegiate sports. Some sports like football and soccer have seen their last action until 2025. Women’s volleyball is competing in the NCAA tournament, and the hockey and basketball season is starting to pick up as we head into the new year. While there is plenty to look forward to in the new year, it’s worthwhile to reminisce on a handful of achievements that Bucky gave us in 2024. Men’s soccer and their early season spark The Wisconsin Badgers men’s soccer team provided an exciting start to their season that hadn’t been seen in quite some time. With no votes in the national preseason poll before regular season play began, the Badgers would go on to prove that they deserved much more attention than anyone initially gave them. The Badgers ended September with a 6-1-1 record and were ranked No. 8 in the United Soccer Coaches Top 25 NCAA poll off the back of a youth movement happening in Madison. Freshman forward Dean Boltz exploded onto the national scene during the Badgers’ hot start. Boltz totaled eight goals and three assists in the first eight games of the Badgers season, giving him serious consideration for Freshman of the Year honors. But this blazing start wouldn’t last long, as the team would go 1-4-2 in the games following the start of October. This lackluster finish to the season narrowly denied a Big Ten Tournament bid for the Wisconsin Badgers. Despite the heartbreaking end of the season, there is much to be confident about when thinking about the overall picture. Boltz ended up being named the Big Ten Freshman of the Year and landed on the All-Big Ten Second team. Wisconsin now has the key goal of trying to maintain the components of this season to build on in 2025. If the early start showed us anything, this team has the pieces to be a real threat to the Big Ten and the entire nation if they can put it all together. Women’s soccer’s NCAA tournament run Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The 2024 Wisconsin Badgers women’s soccer program saw a continuation of the foundations laid in its 2023 season. Posting a 10-6-5 record in the regular season, the Badgers turned their game up in the last five games of the season, winning four of their last five. Similar to the men’s soccer team, the women’s soccer team had a prolific goal scorer who helped propel them to postseason success. Graduate student Aryssa Mahrt scored 10 goals alongside four assists on the season. On top of the Mahrt’s scoring boost, four other teammates had multiple goals on the season. Even if Mahrt stood out as the lead goal scorer, there were plenty of options for the team when looking for a goal. Although they lost in the first round of the Big Ten Tournament against Ohio State, the Badgers pushed on toward the fifth seed in the NCAA soccer tournament. Wisconsin jumped to a 2-0 lead over Maine in the first three minutes of their first-round matchup thanks to goals from Mahrt and senior Ashely Martinez. It would be smooth sailing from there, leaving with a 3-1 win when the final whistle blew. Next was a trip to Irvine, California, to face off against the No. 4 Virginia Cavaliers. The game was a tense one, with the two squads having to conduct a shootout to crown a winner after a stalemate in overtime. The Badgers made each of their four shots, and after the Cavaliers missed their second shot out of four, Wisconsin sealed the upset win. The Wisconsin Badgers were going to the Sweet Sixteen for the first time since 2021. In the Sweet Sixteen, the Badgers faced the No. 1 USC Trojans. Unfortunately for the team, this would be the end of their season. USC jumped out to a 3-0 lead, and despite a late goal from midfielder Dara Andringa, the game ended 3-1 for the Trojans. Aside from the sour end, the women’s program has much to appreciate when thinking about the 2024 season. They’ll have to retool a bit next year, but another NCAA Tournament run shouldn’t be out of the picture for this team. Men’s basketball beats Purdue in Big Ten Semifinal To round off the list, we’ve got an iconic game in Wisconsin men’s basketball lore. Before heading into the Big Ten Tournament in the 2023-24 season, the Badgers were on the brink of collapse. Losing eight of their last 11 games of the regular season, the hot start they saw to begin the year started to fade. And then the Big Ten Tournament started. A convincing win against Maryland in the first round set them up for a second-round matchup against the fourth-seed Northwestern Wildcats. After breaking away with a 70-61 win, it was time for the semifinal against a familiar foe. Wisconsin played Purdue twice in the regular season, both contests ending in close fashion. A combined 14-point differential in both games showed that the Badgers could keep up with the top-ranked Boilermakers. This matchup proved to be no different, as both teams posted the same number of points in each half. With the score tied at 70 apiece, the two went to overtime. After two made free throws by NBA lottery pick Zach Edey, Purdue was up by three with 46 seconds to go in overtime. The Badgers would have to rally quickly if they wanted to be in the Big Ten Championship. And rally they did. A Chucky Hepburn layup and an offensive foul committed by Purdue gave the Badgers the chance to take the lead with 22 seconds left. With the score being 75-74 Purdue, it was time for someone to make their moment. Junior Max Klesmit made the play of his life, hitting a floater with 4.8 seconds left in overtime to give the Badgers the lead. The clutch bucket proved to be enough, as Purdue simply didn’t have enough time to respond. The Badgers were moving on to the Big Ten Championship. After a shaky end to the regular season, The Wisconsin Badgers men’s basketball team showed resilience in the Big Ten Tournament that everyone had to respect. After their hot start this season, one could point to this game as the moment the Badgers really stepped into their own as a unit. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State Column: Wisconsin football hits rock bottom as 2024 season comes to a close
Photo by Henry A. Moore | and Gabriella Hartlaub The Daily Cardinal ARTS The Cardinal calls out its favorites from 2023 After Hollywood’s sizzling hot labor summer, The Daily Cardinal cools off by shouting out its favorites in film, television, gaming and music from 2023. By Tess Voigt , Joseph Panzer , Jasper Bernstein , Noah Fellinger , Spencer Ball , Ava Menkes and Ian Wilder December 7, 2023 | 2:00am CST As New Year’s Day draws near, so concludes an excellent year for arts and entertainment. 2023 gave us many great films, music, games and stunning television, and historic advancements in labor rights for Hollywood writers and actors as a result of strikes by the Writers Guild of America (WAG) and the Screen Actors Guild — American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA) during “hot labor summer.” 2023 also saw Marvel Studios VFX workers vote unanimously to unionize, citing a lack of protections enjoyed by other workers in Hollywood. This would be the first ever unionization effort by VFX artists to date. As hot labor summer cools off and Madison settles in for a long winter’s nap, now is the time to show our appreciation for the work of these and many other artists from the past year. To that end, The Daily Cardinal is here to call out our favorites in film, television, gaming and music from 2023. Movies ‘Oppenhiemer’ - Joseph Panzer “Oppenheimer” is separated from other spectacular films that came out this year due to Christopher Nolan’s impeccable visual and narrative style. The nuclear bomb test sequence, codenamed “Trinity,” was a marvel to behold in IMAX and masterfully conveys the overwhelming destructive power of the bomb. As the columns of fire emanating from the mushroom cloud overwhelmed the frame, it became clear why Oppenheimer viewed that moment in his life as one of divine significance. Likewise, the inspired decision to tell the film in a non-chronological order, a rarity in mainstream American cinema, lent the story an almost stream-of-consciousness quality that allowed the audience to experience the world as Oppenheimer did. Nolan is one of the few directors who can create a film which is monumentally grand in its themes yet intimate in its presentation, and that is why “Oppenheimer” is one of my favorite films of the year. ‘Five Nights at Freddy’s,’ the movie - Tess Voigt I was a little late to the Five Nights at Freddy’s (FNaF) trend. However, after a friend attempted to explain the entire plot of the franchise to me on a walk home, I decided to explore FNaF for myself. To call the series’ lore extensive is an understatement. Like many fans, what first attracted me to the franchise were the numerous easter eggs and hidden meanings woven into the games for more eagle-eyed players and franchise enjoyers. Five Nights at Freddy's is nostalgic escapism that has united an online community around a simple video game about surviving five nights stalked by evil, possessed animatronic animals. Yes, it may be cringe, but we cringe together. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email I can also unabashedly say that the “Five Nights at Freddy’s” movie is one of my favorites, especially for its use of Josh Hutcherson and, like the games that inspired it, the film’s many hidden easter eggs. TV Shows ‘Succession’ Season 4 - Spencer Ball "Rich people doing stupid things" is an increasingly hot genre, and no film or television series has done it better than “Succession.” The show is incredibly layered and complex, deftly weaving smart comedy, character-driven drama and cultural satire without losing sight of itself. The talent on both sides of the camera brings their A-game to every episode, and it’s impossible to find a weak link in the bunch. This year’s fourth and final season stayed true to its characters, following every idiosyncrasy and ambition to its Shakespearean conclusion. Secrets were revealed, politicians were elected and corporate blood was shed in a whirlwind that deserves a spot in the pantheon of all-time TV greats. Topping it all off is Nicholas Britell's breathtaking score, which never ceases to excite. ‘Loki’ Season 2 - Jasper Bernstein “Loki” Season 2 is the culmination of a character arc that’s spanned half my life. And, oh, is it glorious. Over the course of 12 years, we’ve watched Loki evolve from an irredeemable villain into someone who cares so deeply for his friends that he’s willing to sacrifice his life for their safety. As a series, “Loki” serves as a model for all directors on how to approach the concept of the multiverse. The show demonstrates that, when dealing with a concept as expansive as the multiverse, the most compelling approach is to concentrate on character-driven stories. Tom Hiddleston, along with the rest of the cast of “Loki” — including Owen Wilson and Jonathan Majors — delivered a pitch-perfect performance that gave the former villain the most complete character arc in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Video Games ‘The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom’ - Ian Wilder Nintendo faced a massive challenge when developing a follow-up to the ever-successful “The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild.” Nevertheless, “Tears of the Kingdom” is a worthy — if not better — game. Far from a weakness, the similarities to the game’s predecessor are a major strength — one that allows the game to build on the Hyrule fans know and love to create a uniquely breathtaking experience. Whether you're soaring through the sky, exploring the vast open world or getting lost in Link's story, everyone can find a reason to love this game. The beauty and familiarity gamers came to love in the previous installment will certainly engross them in this memorable new addition to the ever-growing Legend of Zelda series. Music ‘GUTS’ - Ava Menkes After two years of re-listening to Olivia Rodrigo’s debut album “Sour,” her sophomore album “GUTS'' offers a vibrant comeback that mixes her slower breakup songs with a more pop-punk sound. I always loved Rodrigo for her relatable lyrics centered on the teenage girl experience, and she continues this trend in “GUTS” with tracks like “all-american bitch” and “lacy.” These songs capture the confidence and self-consciousness a young girl can feel, whether conveyed through a piano ballad or tracks of her screaming. The album perfectly navigates a fine line between love, rage, obsession and revenge. It often feels as though she’s read lines out of your journal. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Jasper BernsteinJasper Bernstein is news manager for The Daily Cardinal. He previously served as the associate news editor, covering city, campus and breaking news. Follow him on Twitter at @jasperberns. Noah FellingerNoah Fellinger is an Arts Editor for The Daily Cardinal. He's covered the performing arts, new film and television releases, and labor issues in the arts. Follow him on Twitter at @Noah_Fellinger. Ava MenkesAva Menkes is the managing editor at The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the state news editor. She has covered multiple stories about the upcoming election, healthcare and campus, and written in-depth about rural issues, legislative maps and youth voter turnout. She will be an incoming intern with Wisconsin Watch. Follow her on Twitter at @AvaMenkes. Ian Wilder Ian Wilder is a sports editor for The Daily Cardinal. He's covered the men’s hockey beat, and has written in-depth about state politics and features. Follow him on Twitter at @IanWWilder. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Trump secures second White House term with campaign built on authoritarian impulses Former President Donald Trump successfully edged out Vice President Kamala Harris to secure a second term in office, marking an era of authoritarian impulses and controversial rhetoric on immigrants and the economy. By Anna Kleiber November 6, 2024 | 11:48am CST Former President Donald Trump defeated Vice President Kamala Harris in a blowout 2024 presidential race, winning his second term in office. Trump — who was slapped with two impeachments, charged with plotting to overturn the 2020 election, survived an assassination attempt and was found liable for sexual abuse — marked his campaign with authoritarian impulses and controversial rhetoric on immigrants and drew accusations of fascism from his former White House officials. Early Wednesday morning, Wisconsin’s 10 electoral votes gave Trump the 270 he needed to secure the presidency. Along with Wisconsin, Trump won Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Georgia and is expected to win the remaining three battleground states. “This was a movement like no one has ever seen before,” Trump said after winning a series of battleground states. “Frankly, I believe this was the greatest political movement of all time.” With a second term, Trump previously promised to “liberate” the Midwest from “illegal aliens” through mass deportations, enact tariffs on a wide range of imported goods and bring “guaranteed” peace in the world. A major controversy of Trump’s campaign was his link to Project 2025, a 900-page document drafted by the conservative Heritage Foundation that lays out a roadmap for an overhaul of the U.S. government. While Project 2025 doesn’t explicitly call for a nationwide abortion ban, it proposes steps to further restrict the procedure and goes farther than Trump has said he would go on the issue. The plan would also cut funding to government organizations that promote the scientific consensus that human activity is responsible for climate change and would pull the U.S. out of the Paris Climate Agreement, which it labels as “climate fanaticism.” A lack of action on climate change would severely damage Wisconsin’s complex ecosystem through its effects on the migratory patterns of wildlife, and result in a crippled agricultural sector according to the Environmental Protection Agency. The nearly 3.4 million votes cast in Wisconsin is roughly 200,000 higher than the ballots cast in the 2020 presidential election. Trump won the state by 0.9% over Harris, or roughly 31,319 votes — just less than one percentage point. Trump's margin of victory looks similar to President Joe Biden’s margin of victory in Wisconsin in 2020, who beat Trump by a little over 20,000 votes, and Trump’s own victory in 2016 with a margin of 23,000 votes. In 2020, Biden beat Trump in the state by less than one percent of votes. NBC News reported Dane County was one of the seven counties that could decide the election. In the Democratic stronghold, Trump received 23.4% to Harris’ 75.1%, according to an independent data analysis from The Daily Cardinal. Harris underperformed in the county by 0.4% compared to Biden’s 75.5% in 2020. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email On University of Wisconsin-Madison campus wards, Harris underperformed by seven points compared to Biden in 2020, the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball loses home series against Penn State Wisconsin Badgers softball scored more total runs than Penn State this weekend but still lost the overall series. By Abby Shulman April 22, 2024 | 1:26pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Penn State Nittany Lions at the Goodman Softball Complex on April 19-21. Wisconsin scored a total of 20 runs over the three-day stretch compared to Penn State’s 16 runs but still went 1-2 for the series. Coming up short Wisconsin started off on the wrong foot during Friday’s series opener, losing 3-1 with 11 Badger strikeouts and only two hits. After Wisconsin’s fielding eliminated the first three batters in the top of the first — one being a strikeout by starter Tessa Magnanimo, who pitched all seven innings — the second inning saw Penn State’s batter crank a leadoff solo homer for a 1-0 lead after the bottom of the second. By the third inning, Penn State led 3-0, resulting from two RBIs when Badgers dove for the balls in play but fell short. Magnanimo locked in and allowed no more runs, and the Badgers improved in the sixth during both frames. They escaped a jam during the top of the inning when second baseman Ellie Hubbard chucked the ball to catcher Emmy Wells, nabbing the runner out at home. They entered the bottom frame and broke the hitless streak when shortstop Ava Kuszak tanked the ball just short of the centerfield wall, sliding into second. They closed at Goodman as a 3-1 ballgame after right fielder Brooke Kuffel attacked a pitch for a solo homer, making this her eighth homerun of the season. Runaway victory comeback While Penn State scored three runs again Saturday, Wisconsin shot out to score a whopping total of 17 in just 4.5 innings. After a dry first inning, Wisconsin secured an early look toward victory during the bottom of the second after relief pitcher Hilary Blomberg and Kuszak both drove in two with doubles for a dominating 4-0 start. Magnanimo started again, giving up an RBI walk and solo homer that cut Penn State’s deficit to 4-2, but the Badgers retaliated in the bottom of the third. After Kuffel and center fielder Peyton Bannon claimed bases, third baseman Skylar Sirdashney crushed a three-run drill out of the park to give the Badgers a 7-2 lead. As if they hadn't put on enough of a power show, the Badgers swept the Nittany Lions in a ten-run inning. The inning began with Kuszak’s seventh home run of the season after sending the ball into deep left. The next ten batters reached the bases, with the first Badgers grand slam since 2017 from Sirdashney and a three-run blast from Blomberg before the run rule shut the inning down. Relief pitcher Gabi Salo took the mound in the fifth, giving up a solo homer to end the game after the top of the fifth, 17-3. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Losing the series Unable to secure the series win, Wisconsin lost 10-2 in the rubber match Sunday. Magnanimo started on the mound again, giving up a two-run dinger in the first. The Badgers trailed after the first but moved toward a comeback, making it 2-1 in the bottom frame as Wells escaped a full count by launching the pitch into center for an RBI double that drove Kuszak home. The third inning was scoreless but had its share of notable plays. On defense, left fielder Alivia Bark’s catch removed the first batter, followed by a double play to end the short frame. Bark singled and Bannon got out trying to steal home in the next frame. The Nittany Lions snagged another run during the fourth and broke through with a six-run rally in the sixth. Bannon robbed a run with a leaping throw to Wells but couldn’t avoid a grand slam. The Badgers retaliated with a run of their own when Blomberg homered on a sharp fly ball before taking the relief role on the mound in the final inning, giving up one more run. The Badgers will play the Indiana Hoosiers in Bloomington on April 26-28 for their penultimate series before closing the season at home against the Maryland Terrapins on May 3-5. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Bailey Krause | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S HOCKEY Badgers women's hockey sweep Tommies in record-breaking weekend During two intense games against St. Thomas, Casey O’Brien made her 139th assist, earning her the all-time assist title in the program's history, while Caroline Harvey scored her 100th career point. By Clara Strecker November 27, 2024 | 5:17pm CST The No. 1 Wisconsin women's hockey team swept St. Thomas last weekend, winning 6-1 Friday and 5-2 Saturday. An exciting start Directly after the puck drop on Friday, massive energy flowed off the Badgers. Not even three minutes into the first period, sophomore forward Claire Enright found the back of the net after a pass from Sarah Wozniewicz, who managed her way through the offensive zone on a two-on-two. The quick goal did not dissipate the energy for Wisconsin. About four minutes later on an odd-player rush, junior forward Kirsten Simms managed to tip the puck in, doubling the score for the Badgers. With 1:23 left on the clock, St. Thomas freshman forward Isla Lindaman entered the penalty box for tripping, and the Badgers took the advantage. Senior forward Lacey Eden scored on the power play with just 45.5 seconds left on the clock, making the crowd go wild. The Badgers started strong, ending the first period with a 3-0 lead with 12 shots on goal compared to St. Thomas’ seven. Starting the second period, St. Thomas came out slightly more aggressive and prepared defensively and offensively, stopping multiple shots and breakaways and not allowing the Badgers to capitalize on them. But this did not stop the Badgers. After a fantastic save by Badgers goaltender Ava McNaughton, Wisconsin rushed to the other end passing back and forth until sophomore forward Cassie Hall was able to tip it behind St. Thomas’ goaltender and into the back of the net. Soon thereafter, the Tommies came back fighting and managed to get one behind McNaughton, scoring their singular goal of the game. Firing up after their goal, St. Thomas had a couple of close shots on goal, but they were not able to score again. The Badgers ended the period with over double the shots on goal compared to the Tommies. Just 40 seconds into the third and final period of the game, with a massive burst of energy and rush down the ice, sophomore forward Kelly Gorbatenko took a snap shot, earning her fifth goal of the season and adding to the Badgers’ lead. After many attempted shots and very close calls, the Badgers capitalized again. Freshman forward Finley McCarthy added to the tally halfway through the period, and the Badgers sealed the win. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Securing the sweep and breaking records Game two began with high energy from both teams. Right from the get-go, not even a minute into the game, the Badgers rushed to the Tommies’ goal, where fifth year forward Casey O’Brien slipped one in, giving Wisconsin an early lead. Despite their early lead, the first period was an exhausting battle, where both the Badgers and the Tommies came out to fight. Wisconsin hit shot after shot and chased rebounds to attempt again, yet none of them found the back of the net. There were a couple of very close calls for the Badgers, keeping the fans on the edge of their seats. St. Thomas mainly played defensively in the first period, they had a couple of breakaways which McNaughton skillfully defended. Wisconsin had double the shots on goal with 15 compared to St. Thomas’ meek five, during a low-scoring first period. Near the beginning of the second period, senior defender Katie Kotlowski was sent to the penalty box for two minutes for tripping.The Badgers managed the penalty kill with a couple of breakaways, but St. Thomas scored right after Kotlowski was let out of the box. In a scramble at the goal, Tommies sophomore forward Madison Brown managed to tip the puck in, scoring the equalizer. Not even two minutes later, a fired-up Wisconsin team passed back and forth down the ice, allowing Edwards to pass the puck to Hall to score. A minute and a half later, the Badgers scored again. After a beautiful long pass down the ice, Edwards hit a nice shot where she eventually tipped the puck in, giving Wisconsin the lead again at 2-1. O’Brien picked up her 139th assist in her career as a Badger, surpassing Sara Bauer and breaking the school record. O’Brien said in a post-game interview how she is delighted to contribute to this teams success, with the main focus staying on the team and keeping the individual milestones as an afterthought. When discussing the game's goals she added “I don’t really care how it happened, just happy we got the goal, especially where that game was at, we kind of needed it, energy wise.” With just less than five minutes left in the period, sophomore defender Ava Murphy went into the box for roughing, giving St. Thomas their second power play of the game. Tensions only grew when the Tommies almost scored, causing a fight to almost break out. Exactly like their previous power play, directly after Murphy exited the box and Wisconsin managed the penalty kill, St. Thomas scored, tightening the Badgers’ lead to one to 3-2. With a close score, Wisconsin came out strong in the third period. Almost four minutes into play, Tommies senior defender Alli Pahl went into the box for a minor for hooking. Caroline Harvey scored her 100th career point on the power play, extending the Badgers’ lead with a beautiful wrist shot that went right past the St. Thomas goalie. “I just have the greatest team here. I am never focused on the individual accolades, but I was proud of Casey when that came up,” Harvey added in her interview. “When it happened it was a great pass by Lacey, got set up on the power play from everyone on the ice so I couldn’t do it without my teammates. Nothing I care too much about but moving forward and focusing on the next weekend.” With eight minutes left, the Badgers added their fifth and final goal to the board as they found a breakaway where Simms sent a pass to O’Brien who shot the puck in. The Badgers ended the game 5-2, adding their 16th win of the season. Wisconsin is back on the road this weekend and will face Maine Nov. 29 at 5 p.m. CST and Nov. 30 at 3 p.m. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Clara StreckerClara Strecker is a copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She also covers state news. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Tony Casteñeda, center, and his band play a Thursday evening set at the Cardinal Bar Photo by Rowan Fields | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Meet Tony Casteñeda, Madison’s Latin jazz king After five decades, Tony Casteñeda continues to play the genre he jumpstarted in Madison. By Jacob Szczap October 17, 2024 | 4:00am CDT As late afternoon turned to dusk on an October day in Madison, Tony Casteñeda settled into his Thursday evening routine. It involves jamming along on the bongos and congas in the back room of the Cardinal Bar with the five-piece Latin jazz band he leads, the Tony Casteñeda Latin Jazz Band. Thursday is Latin music night at the Cardinal, and keeping rhythm on the drums, Casteñeda’s hands bang away to the Afro-Cuban rhythms while the rest of the band creates an excitingly smooth and exotic sound, bringing the genre of Latin jazz to Madison. “I just love the music, and I love the vibe,” Casteñeda said. Casteñeda, 68, is Madison’s godfather of Latin jazz. He came to the city in 1974 to study at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and in 1977 became a founding member of Olmeca, Madison’s first Latin jazz band. The group played for over 20 years before Casteñeda formed his own group, which has been playing together since 1998. Along the way, he’s forged a path greater than music. A social justice advocate, radio and podcast host and bartender among other gigs, the laid-back Casteñeda is a true jack of all trades. Through a variety of avenues, he has become a true and inviting local figure. Originally from Racine, Wisconsin, Casteñeda got his start in music through his uncle, who played in a Latin orchestra band when he was growing up. When Casteñeda was in fifth grade, his uncle bought him a trumpet, his first instrument. By high school he had a conga drum, teaching himself to beat on to the records of Santana. A few years later when Casteñeda was at UW-Madison, his band Olmeca played on as a live band in the era of disco. With a weekly gig at State Street Infirmary, Olmeca built the foundation for live Latin jazz in Madison. “I wanna say he’s kind of a pioneer,” said Anders Svanoe, the saxophonist in Tony’s band and a leader of multiple other musical groups in Madison, referring to Madison’s Latin jazz culture. “He sort of started that whole scene.” These days, Casteñeda and his band play every Thursday night at the recently reopened Cardinal Bar, with plenty of other gigs scattered in between. This night in the historical bar’s swanky back room, it’s Casteñeda on the bongos and congas, Svanoe belting out melodies and improvisations on the saxophone, Arno Gonzalez providing a Latin percussion flair on the timbales, Dave Stoler bouncing around the keys on the keyboard and Henry Boehm holding the fort down with technique on the double bass. Louka Patenaude also plays with the group, on guitar. In between songs, Casteñeda casually converses with the evening crowd, appearing like there’s nowhere he’d rather be. Before he was Madison’s Latin jazz king, Casteñeda found his footing on the political scene. Arriving in Madison in the mid 1970s, the political climate was still plenty hot on campus. Casteñeda became involved with Mecha, then UW-Madison’s Chicano student organization and fought for a Chicano studies department, which he remembers as a “big struggle.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “There was a lot of political activity at the time,” Casteñeda said. “I’m still involved, and everyone does their part.” Olmeca played together until the late 1990s, and Tony started his own band in 1998, with much of the group still together. The band had a rollicking years-long Sunday night run at the Cardinal, where they would play in front of crowded, cigarette-hazed rooms full of dancers deep into the night. They’ve opened for legendary acts such as Poncho Sanchez and John Santos and have won plenty of local awards. “We’ve been together for a long time, and I really appreciate the loyalty, the commitment that the guys have to the band,” Casteñeda said. At the Cardinal bar, his band seamlessly merged Afro-Cuban rhythms with jazz into a free-flowing, deeply enjoyable sound. Perhaps it’s his laid-back demeanor or his do-anything attitude, but Casteñeda’s decades-long run in Madison has come by no accident. As his invigorating set of Latin jazz came to an energetic end, the Cardinal warmed up. During Latin jazz night, the crowd was fulfilled. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
The Gender and Sexuality Campus Center photographed on November 13, 2024. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Letter to campus administration criticizes reassignment of GSCC director University of Wisconsin-Madison campus community members criticized the removal of Warren Scherer as director of the Gender and Sexuality Campus Center in an open letter to campus administration. By Ella Gorodetzky November 14, 2024 | 4:00am CST Hundreds of University of Wisconsin-Madison campus community members signed an open letter of concern to Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin over the removal of Warren Scherer (per/pers) as director of the Gender and Sexuality Campus Center. Scherer served as director of the GSCC from January 2018 to October 2024, when Associate Vice Chancellor Fernie Rodriguez reassigned Scherer. Scherer’s reassignment, which occurred during LGBTQ History Month, hit the student community hard, the letter said. The letter describes a sense of belonging and acceptance that Scherer brought to the GSCC, saying, “Students sought Warren out for deep mentorship and guidance.” The letter outlines a lack of confidence in Rodriguez and Vice Chancellor of Student Affairs Lori Reesor’s support of LGBTQ+ and QTBIPOC students. “Warren’s sudden removal, without even an opportunity to say goodbye, exemplifies the Student Affairs administration’s disregard for the well-being of marginalized people, particularly QTBIPOC students and employees,” the letter said. Reesor reaffirmed Rodriguez’s decision-making in a statement to The Daily Cardinal and expressed commitment to maintaining an inclusive campus environment for LGBTQ+ students. Reesor declined to comment on specific personnel matters, citing confidentiality. Associated Students of Madison Equity and Inclusion Chair Camren Livermore told the Cardinal Scherer is an important role model for the student community. “Warren was a mentor for a lot of students, provided a lot of advocacy and guidance and, in my personal opinion, was just absolutely amazing at what per did,” Livermore said. Livermore signed the letter in an attempt to raise awareness of the situation and demand more transparency from university student affairs leadership. “I think the letter was absolutely crucial in showing administration and student affairs that this is not something that we're going to let slide,” Livermore said. “It's our way of saying that this is important and we have concerns.” The letter said Scherer’s reassignment could affect the future of diversity, equity and inclusion efforts at UW-Madison, referencing the December 2023 legislative decision to cap funding for university DEI positions. Livermore worries that the university will be unable to fill the position permanently. “The GSCC is at an extreme disadvantage to be able to continue functioning in the capacity that it has been for the past several years,” Livermore said. “It's very concerning to us as student leaders, as a student community in general, that our student affairs leadership is not actually taking into consideration what is best for students.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The letter labels Scherer’s dismissal as “part of a system of anti-queer and racist decision-making perpetuated by Vice Chancellor Reesor that must be immediately addressed and stopped by UW leadership.” A similar situation occurred in 2023 with the reassignment of Gabe Javier, former UW-Madison associate vice chancellor for identity and inclusion, according to the letter. Livermore said Reesor and Rodriguez did not provide any reasoning to the campus community for the decision to dismiss Scherer. “We do know that Warren did not break any policy or do anything wrong, so it's very unclear at this point why the reassignment occurred,” Livermore said. Livermore said they hope for more support for the GSCC in the absence of Scherer. “As an ASM leader, I have been in communication with them,” Livermore said. “I want to create this space of sort of mutual aid, where we can learn how to support the GSCC during this time.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella GorodetzkyElla Gorodetzky is the news manager of The Daily Cardinal. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Students prepare for "Pride and Prejudice," running through Nov. 17. Courtesy of University Theatre. ARTS UW-Madison ‘Pride and Prejudice’ breathes new life, feminism into an Austen classic “Pride and Prejudice” is showing at the Ronald E. Mitchell Theatre through Nov. 17. By Britta Sevcik November 14, 2024 | 4:00am CST It can be difficult to rework a 200-year-old novel for university students. But director and co-adaptor Ann M. Shanahan and co-adaptor and costume designer Aly Amidei’s adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice” brought a new lens to the play, enrapturing the audience in this romantic classic. In an interview with The Daily Cardinal, Shanahan said she appreciates all of the novel’s past adaptations, but “none of them felt like they spoke to what resonates with me about the novel.” For Amidei, this meant a deeper focus “on the unapologetic nature of the women characters,” particularly showcasing how “they stand with both feet on the ground, and they stand in their truth, and they voice their truth in a way that is startling for me, even 200 years later,” she said. All of the actresses, supporting and leading, take on the role of narrator at some point. Passing around the role of narration kept the audience on its toes, replicating the role gossip plays in past and present society. The strength of the play’s female characters was on full display. Although our world looks very different from Austen’s, certain themes still remain relevant today. “Even though it's dealing in a lot of weddings and couplings, it's the voice, the strong voices that make it feel like you can relate to it,” Shanahan said. This was especially communicated by AJ Stoffel’s portrayal of Elizabeth Bennet. Between her convincing recitation of Jane Austen’s hefty dialogue paired with her use of physical comedy and facial expressions, she perfectly portrayed a headstrong Elizabeth Bennet. But no actresses portrayed comedy quite like Amelia Echmeier’s Caroline Bingley and Nora Wondra’s Mrs. Bennet. These ladies delivered lines that had me doubled over in laughter throughout the play. Both co-adaptors felt this play held a strong relevance today. “Pride and Prejudice” continues to still garner popularity in every generation. The cast themselves proved this throughout the production. “There's one person we cast who was named Eliza for Eliza Bennett,” Shanahan said. “[We] had another person who auditioned whose parent's first date had been going to see a movie version of the play.” The costuming of this production posed the unique challenge of capturing the essence of the original novel but in a way that has not been overdone. Amidei, who in addition to her role as co-adaptor also designed the costumes, said the design choices she made not only had to support the story but to work at “shaping the story.” Amidei said sourcing for a period piece was challenging, as they had to borrow, make and buy different items to piece together the costumes for this show. And “because of shows like Bridgeton, and the popularity of Austen in general, you can even straight up order something from Amazon,” she said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Amidei also explained the process of practicing in period costumes by providing practice garments for the actors — the men wore jackets during rehearsals to work on posture, and the women practiced walking in petticoats. Another unique aspect to their adaptation is the use of dance in propelling the storyline forward. The play features multiple balls and dance is used to showcase the emotion of the characters and draw the viewers further into the world of Austen. “That was your Facebook, your social, your TikTok, your Tinder of the Austen era, right?” Amidei said. Choreographer Kristen Rollins had never choreographed for an Austen work before but took the challenge of choreographing the balls in stride. “The dances are just great. They're the best parts of this show,” Shanahan joked. Each week when the actors had dance rehearsals Shanahan was surprised by how enthralled the company became, especially the young men. These balls still held significance, “almost like a square dance, [they] had this timeless kind of identification.” Shanahan shared. The real star of the show was the way in which everything worked together as a unit. Between the actors, choreography and technical execution the company produced a beautiful twist on a timeless tale. “The work of the students on stage, all of them together as an organism, it's astounding,” Amidei said. “Pride and Prejudice” will run from Nov. 8 to Nov. 17 at the Ronald E. Mitchell Theatre in Vilas Hall. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Bailey Krause | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S HOCKEY Badgers women's hockey sweep Tommies in record-breaking weekend During two intense games against St. Thomas, Casey O’Brien made her 139th assist, earning her the all-time assist title in the program's history, while Caroline Harvey scored her 100th career point. By Clara Strecker November 27, 2024 | 5:17pm CST The No. 1 Wisconsin women's hockey team swept St. Thomas last weekend, winning 6-1 Friday and 5-2 Saturday. An exciting start Directly after the puck drop on Friday, massive energy flowed off the Badgers. Not even three minutes into the first period, sophomore forward Claire Enright found the back of the net after a pass from Sarah Wozniewicz, who managed her way through the offensive zone on a two-on-two. The quick goal did not dissipate the energy for Wisconsin. About four minutes later on an odd-player rush, junior forward Kirsten Simms managed to tip the puck in, doubling the score for the Badgers. With 1:23 left on the clock, St. Thomas freshman forward Isla Lindaman entered the penalty box for tripping, and the Badgers took the advantage. Senior forward Lacey Eden scored on the power play with just 45.5 seconds left on the clock, making the crowd go wild. The Badgers started strong, ending the first period with a 3-0 lead with 12 shots on goal compared to St. Thomas’ seven. Starting the second period, St. Thomas came out slightly more aggressive and prepared defensively and offensively, stopping multiple shots and breakaways and not allowing the Badgers to capitalize on them. But this did not stop the Badgers. After a fantastic save by Badgers goaltender Ava McNaughton, Wisconsin rushed to the other end passing back and forth until sophomore forward Cassie Hall was able to tip it behind St. Thomas’ goaltender and into the back of the net. Soon thereafter, the Tommies came back fighting and managed to get one behind McNaughton, scoring their singular goal of the game. Firing up after their goal, St. Thomas had a couple of close shots on goal, but they were not able to score again. The Badgers ended the period with over double the shots on goal compared to the Tommies. Just 40 seconds into the third and final period of the game, with a massive burst of energy and rush down the ice, sophomore forward Kelly Gorbatenko took a snap shot, earning her fifth goal of the season and adding to the Badgers’ lead. After many attempted shots and very close calls, the Badgers capitalized again. Freshman forward Finley McCarthy added to the tally halfway through the period, and the Badgers sealed the win. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Securing the sweep and breaking records Game two began with high energy from both teams. Right from the get-go, not even a minute into the game, the Badgers rushed to the Tommies’ goal, where fifth year forward Casey O’Brien slipped one in, giving Wisconsin an early lead. Despite their early lead, the first period was an exhausting battle, where both the Badgers and the Tommies came out to fight. Wisconsin hit shot after shot and chased rebounds to attempt again, yet none of them found the back of the net. There were a couple of very close calls for the Badgers, keeping the fans on the edge of their seats. St. Thomas mainly played defensively in the first period, they had a couple of breakaways which McNaughton skillfully defended. Wisconsin had double the shots on goal with 15 compared to St. Thomas’ meek five, during a low-scoring first period. Near the beginning of the second period, senior defender Katie Kotlowski was sent to the penalty box for two minutes for tripping.The Badgers managed the penalty kill with a couple of breakaways, but St. Thomas scored right after Kotlowski was let out of the box. In a scramble at the goal, Tommies sophomore forward Madison Brown managed to tip the puck in, scoring the equalizer. Not even two minutes later, a fired-up Wisconsin team passed back and forth down the ice, allowing Edwards to pass the puck to Hall to score. A minute and a half later, the Badgers scored again. After a beautiful long pass down the ice, Edwards hit a nice shot where she eventually tipped the puck in, giving Wisconsin the lead again at 2-1. O’Brien picked up her 139th assist in her career as a Badger, surpassing Sara Bauer and breaking the school record. O’Brien said in a post-game interview how she is delighted to contribute to this teams success, with the main focus staying on the team and keeping the individual milestones as an afterthought. When discussing the game's goals she added “I don’t really care how it happened, just happy we got the goal, especially where that game was at, we kind of needed it, energy wise.” With just less than five minutes left in the period, sophomore defender Ava Murphy went into the box for roughing, giving St. Thomas their second power play of the game. Tensions only grew when the Tommies almost scored, causing a fight to almost break out. Exactly like their previous power play, directly after Murphy exited the box and Wisconsin managed the penalty kill, St. Thomas scored, tightening the Badgers’ lead to one to 3-2. With a close score, Wisconsin came out strong in the third period. Almost four minutes into play, Tommies senior defender Alli Pahl went into the box for a minor for hooking. Caroline Harvey scored her 100th career point on the power play, extending the Badgers’ lead with a beautiful wrist shot that went right past the St. Thomas goalie. “I just have the greatest team here. I am never focused on the individual accolades, but I was proud of Casey when that came up,” Harvey added in her interview. “When it happened it was a great pass by Lacey, got set up on the power play from everyone on the ice so I couldn’t do it without my teammates. Nothing I care too much about but moving forward and focusing on the next weekend.” With eight minutes left, the Badgers added their fifth and final goal to the board as they found a breakaway where Simms sent a pass to O’Brien who shot the puck in. The Badgers ended the game 5-2, adding their 16th win of the season. Wisconsin is back on the road this weekend and will face Maine Nov. 29 at 5 p.m. CST and Nov. 30 at 3 p.m. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Clara StreckerClara Strecker is a copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She also covers state news. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Wisconsin loses Freedom Trophy 44-25 to Nebraska The Wisconsin football team missed several first down opportunities against a heavy Nebraska defense, bringing the Badgers to 14th place in the Big Ten. By Tejas Rao November 26, 2024 | 1:34pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers football team (5-6) lost to the University of Nebraska Cornhuskers (6-5) at Memorial Stadium in Lincoln, Nebraska, on Saturday. While the Badgers lead the overall series 13-5, the Cornhuskers claimed this year’s Freedom Trophy, marking the 10th edition of the Wisconsin-Nebraska historic rivalry. The Badgers’ offense missed several first-down conversions in crucial moments of the game, eventually leading to numerous three-and-outs and forced punts. Wisconsin quarterback Braedyn Locke threw a total of 292 yards with a 66.6% completion, but in the end, it just wasn’t enough to beat the Cornhuskers’ defense in the red zone. Wisconsin’s running backs Darion Dupree and Tawee Walker totalled a combined 121 yards, only eight yards more than the Cornhuskers top rusher Emmett Johnson, who had 113 yards alone. Strong plays from Nebraska’s offensive line and linebackers allowed Johnson to move smoothly through the defensive line and further down the field to create easy rushing touchdowns for the other running backs on his team. The second piece to Nebraska’s successful rushing game was running back Dante Dowell, who contributed to three rushing touchdowns. A complete rushing offense is something the Badgers have struggled to succeed in all season, and against Nebraska’s heavy defense furthered the points gap throughout the ball game. The Badgers’ defense also lacked coordination throughout the game, allowing Raiola and his men to convert to a first down every time Nebraska was within 10 yards, regardless of which down they were currently in. The loss to Nebraska marks the Badgers’ third away loss of the season and their fourth consecutive loss. While the chances of earning a sixth win and earning a spot in a bowl game are low, there were a couple positive takeaways in Saturday’s game. Locke’s completed passes gained the Badgers crucial end zone points and first-down conversions. A better pass completion percentage could very well ensure victories in the upcoming game against the Minnesota Gophers and future seasons’ games. These past two games against Oregon and Nebraska have proved Wisconsin’s offensive line has the ability to maintain the pocket much better than before and looks to be improving game by game. A clean pocket paired with more usage of passing plays may just be the Badgers’ way forward. Wisconsin’s receivers put up all three of their touchdowns against Nebraska, including a two-point conversion. Locke has averaged 1.1 interceptions per game this season, at least one interception every game he’s played in as the Badgers’ quarterback, and seems to be the only barrier stopping Wisconsin from achieving their maximum offensive capabilities. Wisconsin heads back home to Camp Randall on Friday to host the annual Paul Bunyan Axe game against border rival University of Minnesota in their final game of the college football season. The defensive line and linebackers must help out in getting three-and-outs and forcing turnovers. This, in coordination with better passing plays and smarter rushes, is the key to take down the Minnesota Gophers and potentially become bowl-eligible with a 6-6 record in regular season play. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S HOCKEY Wisconsin men’s hockey keeps unbeaten streak alive in season’s first home sweep Wisconsin triumphs over Alaska Anchorage 7-1 on Friday and 2-1 in a shootout on Saturday. By Abigail Bures December 3, 2024 | 12:51pm CST The Wisconsin men’s hockey team’s (5-8-1) energy built on the first sweep of the season against Penn State carried them through their bye week and into the Thanksgiving weekend series against Alaska Anchorage (2-10-2). Coming off a rough start to the season, junior forward Kyle Kukkonen noted the team has been working on closing out games strong. “I take pride in doing the little things and working together…It’s kind of a thing that we preach throughout the week,” Kukkonen said. “Do your job and do little things, and that leads to controlling games and learning how to win games.” Wisconsin triumphs over Seawolves in 7-1 win Wisconsin beat Alaska Anchorage 7-1 in their highest-scoring game of the season so far on Friday night at the Kohl Center. Kukkonen, a transfer out of Michigan Tech, and freshman forward Gavin Morrissey both scored two goals and together assisted on three other goals that night to make strides in their first season as Badgers. Ryland Mosley kicked off the game for the Badgers with an even-strength goal and only three minutes, 56 seconds on the clock. Morrissey started the play from behind the net and brought the puck up to the corner where he traded places with sophomore forward Quinn Finley. A pass from Finley was then dumped to Mosley, who had great positioning directly in front of the net and finished it off for the Badgers. Kukkonen made his third goal of the season on a penalty shot. The junior forward advanced on the Seawolves’ goaltender Greg Orosz from the left side before attacking the right side of the goal. With these two opportunities and a strong defense, the Badgers ended the first period leading 2-0. Finley scored first in the second period after a blocked shot on goal was rebounded his way for Wisconsin’s first — but not last — score of the night on a power play. Shortly after, Wisconsin forward Jack Horbach received a five-minute major penalty for hitting from behind, but the Badgers ran the clock down and maintained their 3-0 lead with only four players on the ice. Morrissey followed in Finley’s footsteps and scored the second power-play goal of the night for Wisconsin. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “He brings it every day,” head coach Mike Hastings said of Morrissey's consistency this season. “The game rewards you when you put the work in consistently.” Just three minutes later, Morrissey scored the next goal with Mosely on the assist. The freshman has four goals and 11 assists so far this season. “I’ve got two great players on my line, and finding chemistry with those guys has been big for me,” Morrissey said. “That’s why me and those guys have been ready to go and I think have still done pretty well for the start of the season.” In the second period, Wisconsin scored one goal and Alaska the other, leaving the game 5-1 with Wisconsin ahead at the end of the period. Kukkonen fired the puck just past the glove of Orosz and into the top right corner of the net off a deflected shot from junior forward Christian Fitzgerald. 26 seconds later, the Seawolves made their first and only goal of the night with an even-strength goal by freshman forward Dylan Contreras. But that single goal wasn’t enough for a Seawolves comeback. During a quiet third period, only one goal, made by Wisconsin graduate student forward Cody Laskosky, was scored, ending the game 7-1 for Wisconsin. A narrow game two The Badgers managed to win narrowly in an overtime game that ended in a shootout on Saturday night featuring a Badgers Beyond Borders event. Wisconsin goaltender Tommy Scarfone held the net for the Badgers Saturday night, looking to hold the Seawolves as well as he did on Friday. Alaska Anchorage mixed up their roster and replaced Orosz with freshman goaltender Tyler Krivtsov. A power-play goal by Alaska Anchorage freshman forward Ryan Johnson held Wisconsin 0-1 from the end of the second period until almost the end of the third. With a minute and a half left on the clock in the third, Wisconsin pulled Scarfone to put six men on the ice in an attempt to tie the game. It paid off as Mosley sunk a goal with only 19 seconds of game time left. Wisconsin remained offensively strong for much of the first overtime period. The Badgers had 10 shots compared to the Seawolves’ one. Two shootout goals from Wisconsin’s Finley and Mosley won the competition for the Badgers. Anchorage had three attempted shootout goals, with only senior forward Maximilion Helgeson scoring on Scarfone. Anchorage served eight minutes of penalties during this game, but Wisconsin wasn’t able to capitalize on any of them, putting its’ goals-opportunities for power plays this season at 11-52. Four-game win streak The Badgers fought back against their losing record in this series and now have four-game unbeaten run. Two Wisconsin players, Ryland Mosley and Gavin Morrissey, had a four-point game Friday night, the first for a Badger since Finley in January. Kukkonen’s penalty goal was the first opportunity Wisconsin had at a penalty shot since Finley's against Ohio State last season. “I thought we kept playing offense,” Hastings said in a post-game press conference. “We possessed the puck, we made some plays, but we didn’t do it in areas to kick Alaska into transition.” Saturday night marked higher point streaks for both Finley and Mosley. Beginning during the Minnesota game on Nov. 8, Finley has a career-high six-game point streak with four goals and seven assists. Mosley is on a five-game point streak with five goals and four assists. Captain Owen Lindmark said he was proud of his success during faceoffs on Saturday. With a game record of 22-27, Lindmark had the most opportunities of any Badger that night in the circles. “I just try to take ownership in the faceoff circle,” Lindmark said. “Being in my sixth year here, I think that that’s probably the strongest area of my game, and I take a lot of pride in any chance I can get to help the team out. That was in the faceoff circle tonight.” After 14 games, Wisconsin’s record is now 5-8-1. Up next: Wisconsin plays their final home games of the fall semester on Dec. 6 and Dec. 7 against No. 1 Michigan State. The annual UW Teddy Toss will happen during Friday night’s game. Fans can bring teddy bears and donate them to Toy For Tots during the Teddy Toss. Friday night is also Winter Wonderland-themed, and fans are encouraged to wear holiday apparel. Saturday night honors former Badger Joe Pavelski, who recently retired after 18 years in the NHL. Pavelski played for Badgers from 2004 to 2006 and was drafted to the San Jose Sharks, where he played for 13 years and served four of those as captain. At Wisconsin, Pavelski was part of the championship team in 2006 and scored 101 points, the ninth Badger to score over 100 points during their first two seasons. The puck drops at 7 p.m. both nights. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Melissa Agard speaks at a TAA - AFT outside of the Board of Regents meeting on August 22, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Melissa Agard wins Dane County executive race Sen. Melissa Agard, D-Madison, defeated Dane County Supervisor Dana Pellebon for the county’s top seat Tuesday night. By Joseph Panzer November 5, 2024 | 11:35pm CST In a special election on Tuesday night, Sen. Melissa Agard, D-Madison, won the Dane County executive race over challenger Dana Pellebon. Agard received 61% of the vote at 74.6% of precincts reporting — a 23.3% margin over Pellebon’s 37.7%. Declaring victory in a speech at the Embassy Suites hotel in downtown Madison, Agard affirmed her interest in finding togetherness as executive. “We are one community and with a shared set of values grounded in equity, in progress and innovation, we can move our county forward,” Agard said. The election was called after former Dane County Executive Joe Parisi announced in October 2023 that he would be retiring. Since stepping down in May, the position has been filled by former Dane County Supervisor Jamie Kuhn. Agard and Pellebon landed on the ballot after defeating candidates Wes Sparkman and Regina Vidaver in the August primary. The county executive is responsible for overseeing county government departments, approving or vetoing resolutions from the Board of Supervisors and submitting the annual budget to the county board. Agard previously told the Cardinal that as county executive, she will prioritize including student perspectives on housing affordability issues to address cost of living concerns. In a Q&A with the Cap Times, Agard has also said that addressing climate concerns, racial disparities and prioritizing workforce development and small businesses will be goals of her administration. Agard will serve until the end of Parisi’s term in April 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Irena Clarkowski | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Ald. Juliana Bennett calls for legal reform after report finds insufficient evidence for sexual harassment violations by Ald. Charles Myadze District 2 Ald. Juliana Bennett called for legal reform after a reopened investigation into sexual harassment allegations against District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze found he had not committed workplace harassment. By Ella Hanley November 17, 2024 | 6:35pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. A recent investigation released by the city of Madison found there was insufficient evidence to prove that District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze committed significant workplace harassment, despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them. The incident does not qualify as workplace harassment because Myadze’s behavior did not disrupt the women’s ability to perform their jobs, according to the investigation. One of the women was District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett, who spoke with The Daily Cardinal on Saturday about her mindset once the investigation concluded. “My case was revised because I maintained a professional relationship after Ald. Myadze threatened me,” Bennett told the Cardinal. “Since as a society we condition women to keep the peace, it is common for women to remain cordial in the face of abuse. Our legal system should reflect this nuance.” In a statement released Thursday, Bennett said Myadze made continuous, unwanted and sexually inappropriate advances toward her at a 2022 conference in Washington, D.C. Once she returned home, and he found out she had reported the incident to other alders, he cornered her in his car and threatened her aggressively. “I was paralyzed with fear,” Bennett said in the statement. “Ald. Myadze made it abundantly clear that if I were to speak about this situation again, he would punish me with retaliatory actions on Council.” Three other women came forward against Myadze with similar allegations of unwanted sexual advances and threats, and multiple former partners have accused him of physical assault, including former deputy mayor and mayoral candidate Gloria Reyes. Bennett told the Cardinal that legal reform is in order, sharing how women in these situations are often conditioned to “keep the peace” and remain cordial during abuse. Independent elected officials, such as alders, are not under the same jurisdiction as city employees, according to a statement from Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway. Bennett told the Cardinal the Common Council should include alders under the employee section of the city’s code of conduct, which would create a clearer path to “holding alders that engage in misconduct accountable.” The initial investigation into Myadze conducted Aug. 9 found sufficient evidence of workplace hostility and harassment but was recently revised after Myadze’s attorney requested the case be reopened. Myadze submitted in a written declaration, among other documents, that he believes a “campaign was orchestrated” to discredit him. Myadze has denied all domestic violence and sexual harassment allegations, according to the investigation report, Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email "I fully cooperated with the independent investigation into the various allegations, and I was pleased though not surprised, that the investigator found that none of the complaints against me were sustained by the evidence,” Myadze said in a statement to Channel 3000 Thursday. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan said Myadze’s actions “are unbecoming of an elected official” and called for Myadze to resign immediately from the Common Council. “Elected officials should be held to a higher standard of conduct,” he told the Cardinal. Rhodes-Conway said in a statement Thursday that further courses of action are in the hands of the “public and the political process.” “While such behavior may be normalized elsewhere, I would hope that in Madison we have higher standards," Rhodes-Conway said. Bennett said the “intense power imbalance” and severity of his threats led her to keep silent. “After spending over two years of being afraid of Ald. Myadze or what might happen to me if I went public, I now feel the strength of standing in my truth,” Bennett said. “It’s not easy to stand up, but once you do, the strength and power you feel from being free from abuse is so worth it.” Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Zoe Bendoff | The Daily Cardinal News Ask Morgan, welcome back edition: From starting new to ending unsure, I’m here to answer all your back to school queries. By Morgan McCormack September 5, 2024 | 2:00am CDT All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Hello and welcome back Cardinal readers! It doesn’t matter if you are new or returning to the great school of The University of Wisconsin-Madison, you all need the same thing: advice. Let’s face it, I really am the only person in the world that knows what they are doing. Unlike you all, am I able to navigate any and all situations, I even was able to convince my parents getting a degree in creative writing was a good idea. Lucky for all of you I am kind enough to share my knowledge by answering your wonderful questions. So, let’s kick off the semester with two questions from readers like you. Hey Morgan, I’m a freshman and was super excited to start college. A bunch of my highschool friends decided to go here too, and at first I thought it was a blessing because I would already have a built in friend group. Well, it’s literally been a week and I realized I never want to see any of those people again. At the same time I haven’t really made any other friends so I’m nervous about cutting them off and being alone. What should I do? I too hail from a Wisconsin high school that was basically a Madison feeder school. What I’ve learned is you are not supposed to be college friends with your high school friends. It’s like those shows where the characters are in high school and the first couple seasons are really good. If you’re smart, you end the show there so it can be remembered fondly, but when greedy show producers sometimes send them to college to get a couple mediocre seasons, it ruins the entire way we see the show. Some shows, and people, are meant to end after graduation. Being alone is scary, but what’s the alternative? Let’s face it: you probably were only friends with these people because you were trapped in the same building for seven hours a day, five days a week together. You need to move on and find yourself away from the people you took homecoming pictures with. Having no friends isn't even the worst thing that could happen. If you stick with these people, you might just snap one day and do something you might regret. Trust me, that is a lot of money in legal fees. It’s better to just distance yourself and find people you actually have something in common with. Hope this helps! Hey Morgan, I’m a senior this year and I’m about to graduate with a degree in computer science. I chose it because I love techie things and thought it was a stable career. Well now apparently the job market sucks and I’m nervous about graduating. What should I do? Listen, I would normally feel bad. The job market is hard and graduating is scary. That being said, having to hear my degree was useless from tech types most of my college career, I feel like this is some kind of cosmic karma. Oh, I’m going to school to become a barista, well pass the almond milk because we’re going to behind that pastry counter together. However,if you are truly passionate about computer science you should stick with it. College should be treated like it was in the 1800s, minus the only accepting rich white men thing. You go for the pursuit of knowledge and to get your parents off your back about marrying a cousin. In the end it doesn’t matter since we’re all going to be project managers at Epic anyways. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Hope this helps! Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Morgan McCormackMorgan McCormack is the beet editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S SOCCER Badgers’ 25th NCAA tournament appearance ends with third round defeat Wisconsin women’s soccer season comes to an end after falling 3-1 to No.1 seed USC in the NCAA tournament Sweet 16. By Gabriella Hartlaub December 3, 2024 | 12:53pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers women’s soccer team’s trip to the NCAA tournament ended on Sunday, Nov. 24 with a 3-1 loss to No. 1 seed University of Southern California in the third round. Sunday's game marked the Badgers’ first appearance in the Sweet 16 since 2021, but even a late goal from graduate student midfielder Dara Adringa couldn’t help them overcome a three-goal deficit to USC. Wisconsin’s first sign of trouble came in the last five minutes of the first half, where the Trojans were given a penalty kick that led to a goal. Fouls proved to be an issue for the Badgers as they wracked up 15 throughout the game. In the first half, Wisconsin out-fouled USC 8-1 and had zero shots on goal. This was a familiar feeling for the team, who went with no shots on goal in the first half of their matchup against No. 4 University of Virginia in the second round of the tournament. If the Badgers keptUSC out of the goalbox, they could’ve pulled off a similar victory to the one against Virginia in a penalty shootout. But once the second half started, USC’s intense offense and scoring, something that they’ve come to be known for, pressed down on the Badgers in full force. The Trojans’ second goal came in the 58th minute with the third coming less than five minutes later. That, coupled with the penalty kick goal from the first half, proved insurmountable for a Badgers team that had three shots on goal the entire game. Wisconsin's season ends with a 10-6-5 overall record and a 5-1-3 record in the Big Ten. In tournament play, Ohio State knocked the Badgers out of the Big Ten Tournament 0-1 and USC defeated them in the Sweet 16. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Mayor’s office moves to remove, replace Ald. Charles Myadze from committee assignments The Mayor’s office recommended the Common Council vote to remove and replace District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze from committee assignments following a sexual harassment investigation and a move to censure. By Marin Rosen December 4, 2024 | 12:58pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway recommended on Wednesday that District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze be removed and replaced on Common Council committees, according to the City of Madison Legislative Information Center. A sexual harassment investigation found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze broke state law despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them, including District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan introduced a resolution Nov. 20 to censure Myadze with the support of Rhodes-Conway and 14 members of the Common Council. “A majority of council members have sponsored a resolution to censure Myadze for his actions which are unbecoming of an alder,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal Wednesday. “Sexual harassment and workplace initimidation is wrong and cannot be tolerated.” Myadze currently resides on five committees, including the Alcohol License Review Committee, Board of Park Commissioners, Greater Madison Metropolitan Planning Organization, Sister City Collaboration Committee and Water Utility Board. “Everyone deserves to work in an environment free from harassment and abuse,” Govindarajan said. “Removing Ald. Myadze from his committee assignments is necessary to maintain trust in our city’s leadership and hold electeds accountable for their actions.” The replacement will be voted on Dec. 10 and has to be approved by a Common Council majority of 11 votes. Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal VOLLEYBALL Wisconsin volleyball defeats USC, UCLA in Los Angeles road trip Sarah Franklin led the Badgers in their sweep against No. 23 USC, and several rookies stepped up in their four-set win against UCLA. By Eliana Mann November 23, 2024 | 4:37pm CST The No. 6 University of Wisconsin-Madison volleyball team traveled to Los Angeles, California last weekend for a two-game road trip, adding two wins to improve their record to 20-5 this season. Fifth-year outside hitter Sarah Franklin achieved a season-best hitting percentage on Nov. 14, and senior middle blocker Anna Smrek did the same on Saturday. Thursday Wisconsin competed against the No. 23 University of Southern California Trojans on Thursday, Nov. 14. The Badgers secured a win in straight sets, with scores of 25-18, 25-19 and 25-12. Both their offensive and defensive skills were on display, as the Badgers earned a .333 hitting percentage as a team while holding the Trojans to .079. The first set began with a service ace for the Badgers from freshman setter Charlie Fuerbringer, setting the tone for the match. Both teams traded points until the Badgers pulled away with two four-point runs. Senior middle blocker CC Crawford earned a big block over star USC outside hitter Ally Batenhorst near the end of the set. The Badgers’ dominance continued from there and they won the set 25-18. The Badgers began the second set with a 9-4 lead, but the Trojans slowly eliminated the deficit to just one point, at 15-14. Later in the set, the Badgers went on a 4-0 run to bring them to set point, featuring kills from junior middle blocker Carter Booth and Franklin. Though it was a pretty close set, the Badgers won 25-19. The third set started with a dominant 7-1 Wisconsin lead. Senior outside hitter Julia Orzol went on an impressive four-point serving run to contribute to this lead, which included two kills and two aces. Match point was an extended rally, but the Badgers came away with a 25-12 win. Franklin led the team with 13 kills and a season-best .632 hitting percentage. She was named Big Ten Co-Player of the Week this week, and it showed in her performance. Fuerbringer also earned a Big Ten honor this week as Setter of the Week, and she racked up 35 assists and nine digs against the Trojans. The Badger block continued to show off as well with nine blocks on the game. Smrek led with six, Crawford earned five, and Carter earned four. Freshman libero Lola Schumacher was the defensive leader in the back row with 10 digs. Saturday Following their win over USC, the Badgers took on the University of California-Los Angeles team on Saturday night. Wisconsin fell to the Bruins in the first set but won the next three to take the game. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Badgers were short-handed defensively, with both freshman libero Lola Schumacher and junior defensive specialist Gulce Guctekin out with injuries. Redshirt freshman Saige Damrow stepped in to play libero, and freshman Maile Chan played defensive specialist. As players who do not typically get much court time during matches, they welcomed the opportunity to show that their hard work in practices really pays off. The Badgers struggled in the first set as they tried to find their footing with this new lineup. Their offense lacked efficiency, hitting just .265 as a team. The Bruins dominated in the second half of the set and sealed the deal with a service ace from freshman setter Kate Duffey. They won 25-20. “I thought we got outplayed in the first set and then we were more disciplined and played harder defensively,” head coach Kelly Sheffield said in an article for BadgerExtra. Wisconsin turned the game around in the second set, but it was a close contest. A few four-point runs helped the Badgers stay on top of the Bruins, and Fuerbringer had two service aces in a row. Crawford’s scrappy play at the net also helped energize her team. The Badgers eventually won the set 25-15 on a service ace from Orzol. In set three the Badgers came away with another win, but it was much tighter. Though the Badgers were plagued with an abnormal amount of service errors all game long, set three saw their worst serving performance, with eight service errors. The Bruins weren’t able to capitalize on this, though. Wisconsin took the set 25-22 on a massive block of graduate student middle blocker Anna Dodson. In the final set, Wisconsin got off to a quick start with a 4-1 lead that only continued to grow from there. Junior middle blocker Carter Booth scored an authoritative kill to bring up match point. Damrow then finished the job with a service ace to win the set 25-15. Damrow earned 15 digs in her libero debut, and Orzol added 12. The setters for both Wisconsin and UCLA shined, with Fuerbringer tallying 47 assists and graduate student Audrey Pak tallying 43. At the net, Franklin had 19 kills, and Smrek contributed 16 while also earning a season-best hitting percentage of .609. For the Bruins, junior outside hitter Cheridyn Leverette had 20 kills. The Badgers hope to extend their six-game win streak against No. 2 Nebraska on Saturday. The match is in Lincoln at 7 p.m., and it will be streamed on the Big Ten Network. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Entrance to the Wisconsin Supreme Court in the State Capitol in Madison, WI. (Courtesy of Richard Hurd / Creative Commons) STATE NEWS ‘We better get this right’: Wisconsin Supreme Court hears oral arguments for 175-year-old abortion law A conservative attorney attempted to convince Wisconsin’s Supreme Court to uphold the state’s 1849 law that would ban abortion with no exception for rape or incest. By Lauren Eno November 14, 2024 | 11:50am CST A conservative prosecutor’s attorney struggled to convince the Wisconsin Supreme Court to reactivate the state’s 1849 law that previously banned abortion with no exception for rape or incest during oral arguments Monday. “We’re trying to figure out if medical providers here are going to be able to save women’s lives,” liberal-leaning Justice Jill Karofsky said Monday. “We better get this right.” Tensions were high during the two-hour session. Attorney Matthew Thome, representing Sheboygan County District Attorney Joel Urmanski, asked the court to overturn a lower court’s ruling that allowed abortion services to be provided in the state, drawing verbal backlash from the court’s liberal judges. Thome told the court he wasn’t arguing about the implications of the 1849 law, rather that the law can co-exist with a 1985 Wisconsin law that allows abortions before a fetus can survive outside the womb. Thomes said a ruling that says the 1985 law effectively repealed the 1849 law would be “anti-democratic.” “It’s a statute this Legislature has not repealed and you’re saying, no, you actually repealed it,” he said. Justice Rebecca Dallet rebuked Thome, telling him white men who passed the 1849 law held all the power at the time, and disregarding laws passed in the last 40 years would be undemocratic. “I fear what you are asking this court to do is sign the death warrant of women and children and pregnant people in this state,” Karofsky said. The history of abortion access in Wisconsin When the Supreme Court ended constitutional protections for the procedure in June 2022, an 1849 law banning abortions with no exception for rape or incest went into effect in Wisconsin, despite a majority of residents approving of abortion until viability. In 2022, Attorney General Josh Kaul challenged the 175-year-old law after Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin (PPWI) filed a petition asking the court to declare abortion access a right protected by the state constitution, arguing the 1985 law supersedes the ban, making the 1849 law null. Dane County Circuit Judge Diane Schlipper ruled in July 2023 the 1849 law does not prohibit consensual medical abortions, allowing PPWI to resume abortion services in the state. This ruling prompted Urmanski to ask the Wisconsin Supreme Court to take up the ruling. The court voted 4-3 along ideological lines to take up PPWI’s case and unanimously to take up Urmanski’s appeal. No oral arguments have been scheduled yet for the PPWI case. While a ruling isn’t expected from the Wisconsin Supreme Court for a few weeks, it is unlikely the 1849 law will be upheld by the court’s liberal majority. State News Editor Anna Kleiber contributed reporting to this article. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
UW-Madison MFA alum Lauren Groff is the author behind this supernatural story. Photo by Image courtesy of Goodreads | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘The Monsters of Templeton’ is a perfect novel for Halloween By Madeline Peterson October 18, 2018 | 7:00am CDT It’s getting to be that time of year. With the changing of the leaves and the ubiquitous presence of pumpkin-flavored drinks comes another important seasonal milestone: Halloween. If you want your reading list to reflect the supernatural vibes of the season, consider reading 2008’s “The Monsters of Templeton” by UW-Madison MFA alum Lauren Groff. Groff’s debut novel follows Wilhelmina “Willie” Upton as she returns to her hometown of Templeton after a disastrous affair with a professor, resulting in a pregnancy she is at a loss for how to cope with. The day she arrives home is the very same day that the corpse of a monster is found floating in the lake near her house, spurring a sequence of events centering on Willie’s quest to find her father. According to an interview with Amherst College, Groff initially began the book as an homage to her hometown of Cooperstown, New York, but quickly found that the story took on a life of its own. Willie is descended from the Templetonian equivalent of royalty, and the novel is told mainly from Willie’s perspective. However, it also incorporates chapters from the perspectives of the numerous ancestors she researches as she delves into her family tree. "A New York Times best-selling author, Groff has written three novels and two short story collections." A New York Times best-selling author, Groff has written three novels and two short story collections, her most recent being “Florida,” which was released earlier this year. All three of her novels have been met with widespread critical acclaim, “The Monsters of Templeton” being no exception. Groff’s writing is lighthearted but complex: Her characters are believable entities with their own distinct voices that keep the network of plot threads from tangling. Perhaps the novel’s most impressive product is Willie’s relationship with her mother, Vivienne. Vivienne Upton is overbearing yet sympathetic, and her rapport with her daughter is unapologetically honest. Hard-edged humor masks the complicated affection between them as Willie struggles to come to terms with her mother’s spontaneous transition from hippie to born-again Baptist. In an attempt to pull Willie from her despair, Vivienne sends her daughter on a quest through the family archives to find her father — a man who, in addition to residing in Templeton, supposedly shares a distant family connection somewhere along the line. At times, Willie’s search can cause the plot to sputter as she spends hours sifting through historical archives in the library. "Groff crafts a world in which ghosts live alongside investment bankers, and a pregnancy is somehow less believable than the existence of a lake monster." In spite of the occasional lag in action, the novel is overall engrossing. Groff crafts a world in which ghosts live alongside investment bankers, and a pregnancy is somehow less believable than the existence of a lake monster. More than anything, though, it is a tribute to nostalgia, an acknowledgment of the allure of the past and the hold it has on us all. It is a book that causes us to think of the places we come from and the people we call family. “The Monsters of Templeton” is a masterful combination of the surreal and mundane that will remain in your memory long after the Halloween decorations are packed away. Final Grade: A- Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Madison Police Chief Shon Barnes gives updates on the downtown Madison mass shooting on June 9, 2024. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School The shooter has been stopped by law enforcement, and neighboring schools in Madison have been put on “secure hold,” according to the Madison Police Department. By Gavin Escott December 16, 2024 | 12:43pm CST A juvenile shot and killed two people and injured at least seven others at Abundant Life Christian School Monday morning. Madison Police Department (MPD) said they found the shooter, a student who attended the school, dead inside. MPD Chief Shon Barnes said in a press conference at noon officers responded at 10:57 a.m. to a report of an active shooter. The police found the suspected shooter dead when they entered the building. Officers did not fire their weapons. MPD previously said at least five people were killed, but they said around 1:15 p.m. Monday they had made an error. At least seven people have been taken to hospitals, and the seven injured victims sustained injuries ranging from life threatening to minor, Barnes said at the press conference. He said this remains an “active and ongoing investigation.” Abundant Life Christian School has around 390 students, according to their website. As of 1 p.m., there is heavy police presence, and roads around the school have been closed off. La Follette High School, Sennett Middle School and Elvehjem Elementary School were put on “secure hold” after news of the shooting broke, a Madison Metropolitan School District spokesperson told The New York Post. The SSM Health Clinic is the reunification site for students and parents, according to an email sent by Dane County Executive Mellissa Agard. Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers said in a statement on X he was “closely monitoring” the situation. President Joe Biden has been briefed on the shooting, and senior White House officials are in touch with Madison counterparts to provide support, the White House told press Monday afternoon. Wisconsin politicians, including U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan and Dane County Executive Melissa Agard expressed condolences and appreciation for first responders. “Stop asking why schools don’t have bullet proof glass and metal detectors at all the doors,” Barnes said. “Ask why schools have to. That's the question that needs to be asked.” Editor's note: this article was updated at 1:17 p.m. on Monday, Dec. 16, 2024 to confirm and update the number of victims reported dead by MPD. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email This is a developing story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gavin EscottGavin Escott is the campus news editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, breaking news and written in-depth on Wisconsin politics and higher education. He is the former producer of the Cardinal Call podcast. Follow him on X at @gav_escott. More This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal
Photo by Drew Wesson | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH After 40 years, Bus Rapid Transit has redefined Madison BRT’s long-awaited debut this fall has helped streamline Madison’s public transportation system, but it’s taken a lot of planning to get to this point. By John Ernst December 5, 2024 | 5:00am CST Chris Phistry has lived his whole life in Wisconsin’s capital. When he began working on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus as a front desk agent at the Fluno Center five years ago, Phistry needed a way to commute into the city from his west side residence. In Madison, the choice is clear: he takes the bus. Five days a week, Phistry takes the bus to downtown, and in September, he began using the brand-new Bus Rapid Transit system. “In the last 40 years, I've been paying attention to the bus system,” Phistry said. “I’ve seen it shift from a much wider coverage of the city to concentrating a lot more on the corridors that see the most service.” BRT as a whole has been a growing movement in American cities, with cities like Madison receiving federal funding though the Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill and Small Starts Grants to implement and build their systems. Wisconsin’s capital city isn’t the first. The federal government has been funding BRT systems since the first lines debuted in Pittsburgh in the early 1980s. As of 2016, there were over 300 miles of BRT service in the U.S., according to the Federal Transit Administration. Route A, the BRT line Phistry takes to and from work, services the east-west corridor of Madison, running just past I-90 on the east side to Junction Road on the west side. On Sept. 22, Madison Metro Transit launched the line, debuting a project over 40 years in the making. In 2012, Metro Transit Capital Projects Manager Mike Cechvala and his colleagues at the Greater Madison Metropolitan Planning Organization drew the first map of the BRT system, running through the same east-west corridor that Phristry and other commuters use every day. The city formally applied for a federal grant to fund the project in 2017 when Cechvala was working for Metro Transit, he told The Daily Cardinal. After a $107 million investment in 2022, Madison received a $110.6 million construction grant for the project from the FTA in 2023. The Biden administration announced plans to allocate an additional $118.1 million in funding to Madison’s proposed second BRT line, running through the city’s north-south corridor, which is expected to open in 2028, Cechvala said. ‘A generational improvement’ Construction for Madison’s initial BRT project began in 2022 and was divided into three contracts: early works, main body and widen sidewalk. Cechvala said much of the construction dedicated to the new stations, bus lanes and infrastructure was part of the main body project. As part of the BRT system, Metro Transit implemented several new features for the ease of travel, streamlining of transit and sustainability efforts. On the roads, passengers can expect to see a few changes, including new stations and bus-designated lanes painted red. There were 31 new stations constructed for the BRT, according to Cechvala. Stations are equipped with benches, heaters and overhead covering. Each contains a farebox where riders can reload their cards with cash, and real time tracking to give minute-by-minute updates on when passengers can expect the buses to arrive. They’re also raised off the ground, allowing for easier accessibility on and off the bus. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I think [the stations] are super nice,” Jack, a graduate student at UW-Madison, said. “I haven't used the heater yet, [but] I'm sure I'll appreciate [it] when it's zero degrees.” Cechvala said the new stations offer good infrastructure and services that are simply easier to use. “If you see a bus stop sign on the side of the street, I think to most people, they look at that and it's just kind of invisible,” Cechvala said. “If you see the BRT stations and see the real time signs, it kind of feels [easier]. It's respectful to people who ride the bus.” Jack has noticed the bus-only lanes have allowed buses to bypass traffic during particularly busy times of the day, such as weekday rush hour. Jack, who lives near the UW-Health University Hospital, has made Route A, which runs down University Avenue westbound, his main mode of transportation. Madison’s BRT also debuted their new fleet of electric buses purchased from New Flyer, Cechvala said. The electric buses will work on Route A and service some of campus buses like Route 80. The buses will be charged on the opposite ends of the line, but also are capable of en route charging, allowing them to run throughout the day, he said. The buses are also a crucial part of cooperation between the city of Madison and UW-Madison, with the latter assisting with the purchase of the buses, according to UW-Madison Transportation Services. A spokesperson for UW-Madison Transportation Services told the Cardinal that although the project predated Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin’s sustainability initiatives, the project will be a crucial part of her goals and help accelerate sustainable progress. Metro Transit will spend the next few months improving the service of Route A before turning their attention to Route B, Cechvala said. For Phistry, Jack and the thousands of others will use the BRT, the next months and years will determine the success of the new line. “This is a generational improvement,” Cechvala said. “We really hope that this investment pays off, and we're really excited about BRT and glad that people are using it.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Wisconsin loses Freedom Trophy 44-25 to Nebraska The Wisconsin football team missed several first down opportunities against a heavy Nebraska defense, bringing the Badgers to 14th place in the Big Ten. By Tejas Rao November 26, 2024 | 1:34pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers football team (5-6) lost to the University of Nebraska Cornhuskers (6-5) at Memorial Stadium in Lincoln, Nebraska, on Saturday. While the Badgers lead the overall series 13-5, the Cornhuskers claimed this year’s Freedom Trophy, marking the 10th edition of the Wisconsin-Nebraska historic rivalry. The Badgers’ offense missed several first-down conversions in crucial moments of the game, eventually leading to numerous three-and-outs and forced punts. Wisconsin quarterback Braedyn Locke threw a total of 292 yards with a 66.6% completion, but in the end, it just wasn’t enough to beat the Cornhuskers’ defense in the red zone. Wisconsin’s running backs Darion Dupree and Tawee Walker totalled a combined 121 yards, only eight yards more than the Cornhuskers top rusher Emmett Johnson, who had 113 yards alone. Strong plays from Nebraska’s offensive line and linebackers allowed Johnson to move smoothly through the defensive line and further down the field to create easy rushing touchdowns for the other running backs on his team. The second piece to Nebraska’s successful rushing game was running back Dante Dowell, who contributed to three rushing touchdowns. A complete rushing offense is something the Badgers have struggled to succeed in all season, and against Nebraska’s heavy defense furthered the points gap throughout the ball game. The Badgers’ defense also lacked coordination throughout the game, allowing Raiola and his men to convert to a first down every time Nebraska was within 10 yards, regardless of which down they were currently in. The loss to Nebraska marks the Badgers’ third away loss of the season and their fourth consecutive loss. While the chances of earning a sixth win and earning a spot in a bowl game are low, there were a couple positive takeaways in Saturday’s game. Locke’s completed passes gained the Badgers crucial end zone points and first-down conversions. A better pass completion percentage could very well ensure victories in the upcoming game against the Minnesota Gophers and future seasons’ games. These past two games against Oregon and Nebraska have proved Wisconsin’s offensive line has the ability to maintain the pocket much better than before and looks to be improving game by game. A clean pocket paired with more usage of passing plays may just be the Badgers’ way forward. Wisconsin’s receivers put up all three of their touchdowns against Nebraska, including a two-point conversion. Locke has averaged 1.1 interceptions per game this season, at least one interception every game he’s played in as the Badgers’ quarterback, and seems to be the only barrier stopping Wisconsin from achieving their maximum offensive capabilities. Wisconsin heads back home to Camp Randall on Friday to host the annual Paul Bunyan Axe game against border rival University of Minnesota in their final game of the college football season. The defensive line and linebackers must help out in getting three-and-outs and forcing turnovers. This, in coordination with better passing plays and smarter rushes, is the key to take down the Minnesota Gophers and potentially become bowl-eligible with a 6-6 record in regular season play. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Column: Wisconsin football hits rock bottom as 2024 season comes to a close After a stunningly poor finish to the season, the Badgers have to pick up the pieces of a lost season. By Dylan Goldman December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Badger fans might as well put on a v-neck sweater and listen to Guns N’ Roses because the Wisconsin football program has dragged itself back to the 1980s. The Badgers, who had a respectable run of success from the mid-1990s to last year, have reached a nadir not seen in a long time. After a dismal 24-7 drubbing against arch-rival Minnesota on Friday, the Badgers lost everything that made the program proud in one day. All at once, they relinquished the cherished Paul Bunyan’s axe to the Gophers and lost their 22-year bowl streak. The Badgers last missed a bowl game in 2001, marking the last time they finished the season with a losing record. That year was an outlier, however, because then-head coach Barry Alvarez immediately corrected course before handing the program off to Bret Bielema. Bielema led the program to three Rose Bowl appearances between 2010 and 2012. Paul Chryst later led the Badgers to victories in the Cotton and Orange Bowls alongside a Rose Bowl appearance in 2020. While the Badgers didn’t compete for a national championship, they won Big Ten titles and made it to the nation’s premier bowl games during this period. When UW Athletics hired head coach Luke Fickell from Cincinnati in 2022, he was expected to take the program back to the heights it had reached in the last 20 years. Fickell’s first season was a bumpy ride, but ended with a victory at Minnesota and a competitive loss in the ReliaQuest Bowl against a strong LSU team. Ideally, teams are supposed to continue progressing every year a new coach is around. This season started promising as the Badgers started 5-2 and played a competitive game against Penn State. Then, the season quickly went off the rails. Wisconsin lost their third straight game to rival Iowa, this time 42-10 and in embarrassing fashion. A close game against Oregon was hopeful, but the Badgers failed to build off it. The Badgers still had a chance to close the season strong but failed miserably. They got blown out by Nebraska 44-25, giving over the Freedom Trophy to the Cornhuskers in their first loss to Nebraska since 2012. Then came the abysmal showing against Minnesota. The Golden Gophers, who came in with a 6-5 record, ran the Badgers out of Camp Randall in resounding fashion. The game showed that the Badgers have a massive void at the quarterback position, but the team also displayed a shocking level of apathy against a bitter rival. In year two of the Fickell regime, there is nothing to write home about. Wisconsin lost all of its rivalry trophies and gave up the precious streaks the program had been celebrating as a sign of its consistency. The Badgers went a meager 3-6 in Big Ten play, with wins coming against a dismal Purdue team and the others against middling programs in Rutgers and Northwestern. Players like linebacker Leon Lowery and cornerback Amare Snowden have already announced their intentions to enter the transfer portal, and there will surely be more that join them in the coming days. Wisconsin’s schedule was undoubtedly tough, but that does not excuse its performance in 2024. The Florida Gators faced an impossible schedule, but they still finished 7-5 with strong wins against LSU and No. 14 Ole Miss. If Florida could make a bowl game, so could Wisconsin. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email While a lot of games on Wisconsin’s schedule were difficult, the fact that Fickell doesn’t have a marquee win so far is alarming. The Badgers have hosted Ohio State, Alabama, Penn State and Oregon in his tenure. While most of those games were competitive, Wisconsin came up short each time. A quick autopsy of the team will show that in addition to poor quarterback play, the defense regressed well below Wisconsin standards. Gone are the days of TJ Watt and others wreaking havoc. This year's defense ranked No. 12 in the Big Ten and only forced eight turnovers. The Badgers have gone from having reliable quarterback play, a dominant running game and a very strong defense to having nothing. Their identity in the Fickell era is still undefined, and they will have to figure it out quickly if the head coach wants to stick around Madison for long. Phil Longo and his “Air Raid” offense has been dispatched, and depending on the fate of defensive coordinator Mike Tressel, Fickell will get a mulligan at forging his team’s identity. Fickell’s credentials are well understood. He has been successful before, and his accomplishments at Cincinnati prove he can build a program. But this is not the American Athletic Conference. The new Big Ten is daunting. Oregon has run roughshod through the conference in its first year. USC and Washington are strong programs that can get going at any time. The Badgers need to figure out how to compete in the new era of conference realignment and NIL. They must re-establish their identity by finding one that contrasts them with conference powers like Oregon and Ohio State. Considering Indiana went 11-1 this season, Wisconsin clearly can still find its way. But if they can’t, the Badgers risk being reduced to a college football afterthought. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
OLYMPUS DIGITAL CAMERA ARTS How Barbenheimer came to the Marquee Cinema Almost 1,000 people showed up to WUD Film’s screening of Barbenheimer. Here’s how it all came together. By Tomer Ronen December 16, 2023 | 2:00am CST Barbenheimer, back-to-back screenings of “Barbie” and “Oppenheimer,” shook the film industry to its core, surpassing expectations and breaking records. About five months later, almost 1,000 people lined up to watch the duo at the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s Marquee Cinema. “It was a big cultural thing,” said junior Ilya Johnson, the Experimental, International & Cult Programmer at the Wisconsin Union Directorate’s Film Committee. “We wanted to bring it to campus.” Barbenheimer is not the first time two summer blockbuster films have competed on the same weekend. But after grossing just shy of $1 billion domestically and $2.4 billion worldwide, it’s safe to say the clash between Greta Gerwig’s “Barbie” and Christopher Nolan’s “Oppenheimer” was the most successful summer showdown since the faceoff between “Ghostbusters” and “Gremlins” in June 1984. Some even speculated Barbenheimer “saved the summer box office” as the film industry recovered from COVID-19. The process of bringing Barbenheimer to Union South began very quickly, said sophomore Emma Weishaar, WUD Film’s Contemporary & Repertory Mainstream Programmer. The associate director team knew Barbenheimer had to happen. “We knew that college students would love this, and we needed to bring it to the Marquee,” Weishaar said. Weishaar was right. Barbenheimer was WUD Film’s biggest weekly movie screening of the semester, in part due to marketing. Johnson said WUD Film ramped up their outreach efforts because they knew it would be such a big draw, and they added an extra showing in anticipation of a large turnout. “People had been asking for months,” Weishaar said. “It is primarily for students, but people in the Madison area often come to our screenings too, and even people that aren’t students were like, ‘Hey when is Barbenheimer happening?’” With finals for students right around the corner, WUD Film thought the second weekend of December would be the perfect time to show Barbenheimer. With the continued in-theater extension of both films, obtaining rights to show them proved to be a challenge for WUD Film. WUD cannot show films while they are still in cinemas because the Marquee is a non-theatrical theater. “We were watching the availability, so every day one of us would log in and check. It was like, ‘When can we get it! when can we get it!’” Weishaar said. “Once they were done, it was pretty much ‘let’s get this going.’” Typically, it takes about two to three weeks for WUD Film to get a movie from the inbox to the theater. Junior Miles Foster, WUD Film’s Alternative & Independent Programmer, told The Daily Cardinal they thought “Oppenheimer” would take a little bit longer because they thought it would take extra time to secure the rights. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Ultimately, the timeline was about the same as any other film, Weishaar said. “It’s probably one of our biggest campus cinematic events of the year,” Foster said. “There’s so many cool things that can be done with it.” The 500 viewers who attended “Barbie” and 430 who came for “Oppenheimer” competed in a costume competition. WUD Film awarded winners a movie-theater quality poster for the film of their choice. Not wearing pink to “Barbie” feels borderline disrespectful, dressing up as Robert Oppenheimer takes commitment. “It’s a really cool weekend because both these movies are really something for everyone and each of them together amplifies it,” Foster said. “I like that it took on this form of ‘let’s hype up both of these movies.” WUD Film also ran Lagueria Davis’ documentary “Black Barbie” on Thursday, which shows the increasing need for inclusivity in Barbie dolls. In addition to running the documentary, Friday’s showing included open captions to make the film more accessible. “We’re here for you. Whatever you need from us that we can provide: captions, other ADA regulations, we will provide that for you,” Foster said. As far as crossovers go, Barbenheimer will be hard to replicate. Paramount Pictures tried to push “Saw Patrol” — a crossover between “Saw X” and “PAW Patrol: The Mighty Movie” — with little success. The duo only brought in about $41 million combined in its opening weekend. “I think what made [Barbenheimer] work was it felt like this trend was created by the people for the people and not so much a corporate ploy for attention,” Foster said. Perhaps “The Garfield Movie” will find its perfect match in “Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes.” in May 2024. One thing is for certain: WUD Film will host a showing of “The Room” and “Black Swan” the last weekend in January, free at the Marquee. You can call it “just another weekend” for them. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Buress' dry charisma and hilarious punchlines gave fans an hour and a half of great comedy. Photo by Image courtesy of Bustle | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Hannibal Buress executes an excellent night of stand-up By Jake Price September 24, 2018 | 9:20pm CDT The self-proclaimed “medium famous” comedian Hannibal Buress performed last week at the Orpheum Theater, engaging the audience with his patently warm and charming demeanor, creative multimedia usage, and of course, hilarious punchlines. Buress, known mainly for his roles in “The Eric Andre Show” and “Broad City,” has an extensive discography but has generated a large following mainly within the last few years. Consequently, the sold-out crowd came in with high expectations, and from start to finish, they were not disappointed, cheering and laughing at Hannibal’s bizarrely comical outlook on subjects ranging from fitness to twins in Madagascar. However, the humor began long before Hannibal took the stage, as DJ Tony Trimm remixed viral videos and retro scenes over popular rap songs, producing an offbeat and irreverent montage. This warmed up the mood and set the scene for Buress’ opening act, Erica Clark. She claimed that this was only her seventh year doing standup, but her natural and balanced delivery made it seem as if she had been performing for decades. While Clark touched on a variety of subjects in her set, one, in particular, stood out. Discussing her job as a special education instructor, Clark talked about the unique life perspective of one of her students. The bit was both endearing and hilarious, and it provided the audience with a fantastic lead-in to the main act, Hannibal Buress. "Buress creatively incorporated multimedia content to add an additional flavor to the standard stand-up formula." As soon as Buress stepped onstage, the excited energy throughout the Orpheum became palpable. Over the next hour and a half, Buress exceeded expectations, joking about his extracurricular experiences with fans, the lyrics in 2 Chainz songs and many other subjects. He creatively incorporated home videos, projections and songs throughout the performance, adding an additional flavor to the standard stand-up formula. Perhaps the most unique decision was Buress’ repeated use of auto-tune and other voice changers which successfully helped embellish his already ridiculous stories. Despite his act being well thought out and strongly executed, Buress deviated from the script and engaged with rowdy fans on two separate occasions. The first time, a guy yelled up to the comic to inform him his zipper was down, which Buress acknowledged to the crowd before deciding to keep it at half-mast for the remainder of the show. About 30 minutes later, a heavily intoxicated woman interrupted Buress during his story about the false ballistic missile alert in Hawaii. Feigning offense, Buress asked if the woman didn’t want to hear about Hawaii, before proceeding to tell the story anyway. "The ability to humorously confront disrespectful audience members is a testament to Buress’ poise and stature." The ability to humorously confront disrespectful audience members is a testament to Buress’ poise and stature. These unscripted moments could have derailed the show for a less confident comedian, yet Buress turned them into two highlights of the show, while still appropriately insulting the interrupting parties. Toward the end of the show, Buress told the story of his arrest in Miami last year for disorderly intoxication. After setting the scene, he played the released body-camera footage on the screen behind him, where he talks to the officer’s camera like he’s a YouTube personality, encouraging viewers to “like and subscribe.” The video proceeds to show an extremely inebriated Buress hurling and slurring creative insults after the officer refused to call an Uber to get Buress home safely. While the body-camera footage itself is hilarious, it was also weirdly reassuring. It showed the audience that Buress’ “schtick” onstage is a genuine representation of his character. Even while facing a humorless officer in a state of mind where up is down and down is sideways, Buress’ sharp yet frivolous personality could not be contained. And just like the rest of the show, the crowd was delighted and fulfilled by Hannibal’s dry charisma. Jake Price is an opinion editor for the Daily Cardinal. To read more of his work, click here. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Photo by Maile Llanos | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE UW-Madison expert stresses importance of abortion access, urges voter action through research The Collaborative for Reproductive Equity conducts, translates and disseminates research, empowering Wisconsinites to make informed decisions about abortion rights. By Lily Spanbauer October 25, 2024 | 4:00am CDT An Avengers-like team of University of Wisconsin-Madison experts are uniting to research and promote civic engagement on the issue of abortion. “Good policy begins with good evidence,” said Amy Williamson, associate director and co-creator of the Collaborative for Reproductive Equity (CORE). CORE is a research initiative at UW-Madison School Of Medicine and Public Health focused on reproductive health, equity and autonomy. Their experts specialize in gender and women's studies, sociology, medicine, OB-GYN and public health, giving Wisconsinites the tools to make informed decisions. Williamson and other UW-Madison leaders established the initiative in 2018 following a decade of large shifts in reproductive health policy and access in Wisconsin. “We're researchers. We're at a university, so we saw our role, our power and our lane as research,” Williamson told The Daily Cardinal. “How can we use that to help people who don't sit in the university build awareness of issues of policies and impact that they may use for civic engagement, policy, programs and law?” In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, ending the constitutional right to abortion. Following the decision, an 1849 law banning abortion with no exceptions for rape or incest went in to effect in Wisconsin. Clinics stopped offering abortion services in the state until last September, when a Dane County Circuit Court judge ruled the 1849 law applied only to feticide, not consensual abortions. Wisconsin Planned Parenthood (PPWI) has since resumed abortion services in three clinics in Madison, Milwaukee and Sheboygan, and Affiliated Medical Services performs abortion services at its Milwaukee clinic. People working in the field of women’s health care had seen signals the Supreme Court would overturn Roe according to Williamson, so when it eventually happened, CORE felt the obligation and immediacy of conducting research that would illuminate its negative effects. “We went into overdrive,” Williamson said. “We went into high gear to evaluate and understand the impact of the changes on people who need care, on families, on health care providers, on people who care for people who can be pregnant or who are pregnant.” CORE gathered qualitative evidence through patient interviews and focus groups and quantitative data through surveys and analysis of health care utilization datasets needed to answer their questions. The post-Roe landscape has resulted in a host of negative effects on women and other people capable of pregnancy, according to a CORE brief. These include increases in pregnancy-related mortality, immediate and long-lasting effects on mental health, increases in chronic health problems, increases in intimate partner violence and a restricted ability to achieve educational, career and other life aspirations. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email During the 15 months where no clinics in Wisconsin offered abortion services, CORE conducted a study with individuals who were pregnant to examine the financial, health and family related decisions that they made in the absence of access to care. CORE is still analyzing the data from this study, so it hasn’t been published yet, but Williamson said the study’s interviews provided a profound insight into the complexity of accessing health care under the abortion ban. “I feel the importance of sharing that truth can't be underestimated,” Williamson said. “It's no question the most profound insight comes from the experiences of real people.” CORE also translates and disseminates research. Translation is all about making research accessible to different audiences to “meet people where they are,” Williamson said. “We're talking about both using plain language and explaining what is done in accessible terms, but also utilizing different forms, whether it's a short brief, a fact sheet or infographics on social media,” Williamson said. Once the research is accessible in terms of understanding, they shift to dissemination — making it physically accessible for the people who need it most. CORE disseminates through direct outreach to individuals, sharing information to organizations and making it available to legislators. Although CORE’s research topics connect with issues on the ballot, Williamson said CORE stays out of politics to keep their focus squarely on research. But Williamson does encourage people to vote and believes that CORE can be one of many sources of information that voters consult before hitting the polls. “We want to be a trusted source of evidence,” Williamson said. “Our reason for being is that our work helps decision-makers, policymakers and just regular people like you and me make informed decisions, and informed decisions includes people's assessment of the issues that matter.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball splits doubleheader against Minnesota Wisconsin Badgers softball went 1-1 in their double header in Minneapolis this past Wednesday. By Abby Shulman April 18, 2024 | 11:56am CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took a road trip Wednesday to play the Minnesota Golden Gophers in a doubleheader, silencing the Gophers in the first game before losing the second. Magnanimo tosses a no-hitter After walking the first batter, starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo retired the next 20 through a total of 83 pitches, winning the Badgers’ first no-hitter of the season 3-0. On top of Magnanimo’s six strikeouts, the rest of the defense had her back, completing an errorless game. Relief pitcher Hilary Blomberg broke the ice for the Badgers in the third with a two-run RBI double. The scoring took a break until infielder Alivia Bark scored an insurance run in the top of the seventh. Third baseman Skylar Sirdashney dove for the ball in the bottom of the seventh, securing the no-hitter and ensuring Magnanimo threw seven scoreless innings. Splitting the DH The adrenaline of winning their first game against Minnesota since 2016 wasn’t enough to prevent a 7-3 loss hours later. The Golden Gophers went up 3-0 in game two by the bottom of the second, with one run in the first inning and two in the second off starter Shelby Jacobson. Wisconsin tied the game in the fourth at 3-3. The Badgers’ first run was an RBI single from outfielder Brooke Kuffel that brought home infielder Grace O’Brien, who hustled home from second. The next run came from outfielder Kate Linkletter, who raced home from third after a dropped third strike to continue on the streak of speed. The final Badger run of the inning and game was Bark’s sacrifice bunt that drove Kuffel home. While the scoring ended for the Badgers, the Golden Gophers made a comeback. They scored three more runs in the bottom frame, extending their lead to 6-3 after a three-run slam. Jacobson allowed one more run in the fifth before Blomberg came in from the bullpen, cutting the game at 7-3. Wisconsin improved their record to .400 and will head back home to take on Penn State on April 19-21 at Goodman Softball Complex. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Irena Clarkowski | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Ald. Juliana Bennett calls for legal reform after report finds insufficient evidence for sexual harassment violations by Ald. Charles Myadze District 2 Ald. Juliana Bennett called for legal reform after a reopened investigation into sexual harassment allegations against District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze found he had not committed workplace harassment. By Ella Hanley November 17, 2024 | 6:35pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. A recent investigation released by the city of Madison found there was insufficient evidence to prove that District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze committed significant workplace harassment, despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them. The incident does not qualify as workplace harassment because Myadze’s behavior did not disrupt the women’s ability to perform their jobs, according to the investigation. One of the women was District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett, who spoke with The Daily Cardinal on Saturday about her mindset once the investigation concluded. “My case was revised because I maintained a professional relationship after Ald. Myadze threatened me,” Bennett told the Cardinal. “Since as a society we condition women to keep the peace, it is common for women to remain cordial in the face of abuse. Our legal system should reflect this nuance.” In a statement released Thursday, Bennett said Myadze made continuous, unwanted and sexually inappropriate advances toward her at a 2022 conference in Washington, D.C. Once she returned home, and he found out she had reported the incident to other alders, he cornered her in his car and threatened her aggressively. “I was paralyzed with fear,” Bennett said in the statement. “Ald. Myadze made it abundantly clear that if I were to speak about this situation again, he would punish me with retaliatory actions on Council.” Three other women came forward against Myadze with similar allegations of unwanted sexual advances and threats, and multiple former partners have accused him of physical assault, including former deputy mayor and mayoral candidate Gloria Reyes. Bennett told the Cardinal that legal reform is in order, sharing how women in these situations are often conditioned to “keep the peace” and remain cordial during abuse. Independent elected officials, such as alders, are not under the same jurisdiction as city employees, according to a statement from Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway. Bennett told the Cardinal the Common Council should include alders under the employee section of the city’s code of conduct, which would create a clearer path to “holding alders that engage in misconduct accountable.” The initial investigation into Myadze conducted Aug. 9 found sufficient evidence of workplace hostility and harassment but was recently revised after Myadze’s attorney requested the case be reopened. Myadze submitted in a written declaration, among other documents, that he believes a “campaign was orchestrated” to discredit him. Myadze has denied all domestic violence and sexual harassment allegations, according to the investigation report, Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email "I fully cooperated with the independent investigation into the various allegations, and I was pleased though not surprised, that the investigator found that none of the complaints against me were sustained by the evidence,” Myadze said in a statement to Channel 3000 Thursday. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan said Myadze’s actions “are unbecoming of an elected official” and called for Myadze to resign immediately from the Common Council. “Elected officials should be held to a higher standard of conduct,” he told the Cardinal. Rhodes-Conway said in a statement Thursday that further courses of action are in the hands of the “public and the political process.” “While such behavior may be normalized elsewhere, I would hope that in Madison we have higher standards," Rhodes-Conway said. Bennett said the “intense power imbalance” and severity of his threats led her to keep silent. “After spending over two years of being afraid of Ald. Myadze or what might happen to me if I went public, I now feel the strength of standing in my truth,” Bennett said. “It’s not easy to stand up, but once you do, the strength and power you feel from being free from abuse is so worth it.” Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Courtesy of Bill McMannis/Flickr OPINION You’re not doing enough: The climate crisis collective action problem Feeling helpless isn’t an excuse when the climate is in crisis By Blake Martin October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT This week, residents of Madison are experiencing the continuation of an unseasonably warm fall. The leaves have changed, and some students have ventured out in sweaters while others are still comfortable making their way around campus in shorts and Boston clogs. As October begins, it’s hard to think about bundling up any time soon — it’s even hard to accept summer has ended. On the other side of the country, Florida residents are bracing for the second devastating hurricane in under two weeks. There, it’s hard to accept this might be the new normal. What does this have to do with us in Madison? As individuals here and across the country, we’re not doing nearly enough to stop the climate crisis that’s causing more intense natural disasters. In the last two weeks, the death toll for Hurricane Helene has risen to 227. Small towns in North Carolina, unprepared for flood waters, have been swept away. Critical infrastructure like Tennessee and North Carolina’s I-40 have failed. This week, students at the University of Tampa are preoccupied with preparing for mandatory evacuations while hospitals in South Florida reinforce flood barriers to protect patients unable to evacuate. Students at UW-Madison are preoccupied with studying for their first round of midterm exams. Students at UW-Madison watch safely from a distance, if they choose to watch at all. For those with the privilege to opt out of dealing with Helene and Milton, it’s tempting to think that while tragic, these severe weather events are nothing out of the ordinary. While the feeling of safety in this thought might be tempting, don’t lie to yourself. While current climate change research doesn’t necessarily suggest an increase in annually recorded hurricanes, those that have made landfall have become more powerful. In the last year, ocean temperatures have risen to record-breaking levels globally, likely caused by a combination of man-made greenhouse gas emissions and naturally occurring weather patterns like El Niño. In the Gulf of Mexico, warmer ocean water serves as fuel for tropical storms like Helene and Milton, allowing them to develop faster and sustain themselves for longer. Subsequently, these storms are likely to deal even more damage with little advance warning, giving those in their path less time to prepare. But, even if we agree tropical storms are getting worse and climate change is to blame, what can “we” do about it? The answer is rather complicated, but the solution is simple: you better do something, and when you’re done, do more. When you start to think about it, the climate crisis can be horribly overwhelming. Around ⅘ of global carbon emissions from 2016 to 2022 are the result of actions by a handful of fossil fuel and cement companies. In turn, popular narratives about climate change lose their individual focus, suggesting small-scale actions like reducing meat consumption, avoiding single-use plastics and taking public transportation when possible are futile. If you’ve taken a political science or philosophy course, this dilemma should sound familiar. If not, you should probably start going to lecture — the climate crisis is a textbook example of a collective action problem. Collective action problems arise in situations where where multiple people have a common goal or responsibility, ranging from things as simple as roommates keeping an apartment clean to the climate crisis. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email To illustrate this point, let’s think of the earth as an apartment with five roommates, all with the common goal of keeping the place tidy, or at least liveable. Some of the roommates never clean up after themselves, and with so many chores to do, the others are starting to feel pretty powerless. Washing one set of dishes won’t clean “the apartment.” Doing one load of laundry won’t get their security deposit back. One person switching from plastic to paper straws won’t stop hurricanes from forming. One person cutting out meat and dairy products won't make flood waters recede. No single chore can clean “the apartment” in the same way no one person can solve the climate crisis. But making the choice to ignore the dishes piling up outside of your bedroom door, or turning a blind eye to worsening weather conditions outside of your zip code actively contributes to the problem. When you think of the climate crisis in the context of individual action alone, you’re helpless to make change. But, that feeling of helplessness is a bad reason to give up. Change can only be made through the sum of our individual environmentally conscious choices. You need to do more, so we do more. When we do more, together, change is possible. So, start small, do more, and don’t stop — we’re counting on you. Blake Martin is a senior studying English & Political Science. Do you agree that as individuals we aren't doing enough to stop the climate crisis? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Blake MartinBlake Martin is the opinions editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball drops series against Rutgers After winning the first game of the series, Wisconsin Badgers softball lost the next two away games against Rutgers. By Abby Shulman April 8, 2024 | 6:39pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Rutgers Scarlet Knights in New Jersey, ultimately dropping the series with two consecutive losses after a phenomenal 5-2 win on Friday. Wisconsin dominates in Friday victory Rutgers started off with the lead in the bottom of the first after various hits off starter Tessa Magnanimo followed by a scoreless second inning. During the top of the third, the Rutgers’ outfielders could only backpedal as catcher Hilary Blomberg smoked a three-run home run over the left field wall. The three Badgers finished their trip around the bases to demolish the Scarlet Knights’ lead and jump ahead 3-1. After centerfielder Peyton Bannon doubled in the fourth, she stole third following a wild pitch. She eventually plated home thanks to an RBI from infielder Alivia Bark. Blomberg, who has a team-leading batting average of .375, put on a power show, with her RBI in the fifth taking pinch runner Marytherese Nevin home for an insurance run. The Knights scored their second and final run in the bottom frame, which was ultimately a break for the Badgers considering the six total base runners throughout the bottom of the fifth and sixth. With no errors and only two Badgers striking out throughout the game, Wisconsin started the series off strong. Badgers tumble downhill after Friday’s victory The scoreboard looked quite different on Saturday as the Badgers were overpowered by the Knights 1-12. Rutgers took the wheel right away, scoring eleven runs in the first two innings. Wisconsin starting pitcher Shelby Jacobson struck the first two batters of the game out but failed to prevent the proceeding home run and grand slam. Without any better luck, Blomberg took over the mound in the second, surrendering three runs and a three-run homer. Infielder Fiona Girardot drove outfielder Brooke Kuffel in for Wisconsin’s only run of the game in the third, followed by one final run from Rutgers in the fourth. The game was called in the fifth inning due to the run rule. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Series win slips away Wisconsin lost the last game of the series Sunday in a less dramatic fashion than the previous game, with the final score tallying 4-1. Wisconsin immediately started off on the wrong foot, allowing Rutgers to take a 1-0 lead in the first after a triple and an RBI off starter Magnanimo. Rutgers pushed the score to 4-0 in the third after a back-to-back two-run shot and solo homer. The Badgers broke through in the fourth when infielder Skylar Sirdashney hit a dinger over the dead center field wall. However, the scoring ended after that despite multiple threats from the Knights, and Magnanimo — who struck out six in game three — got her team out of a bases-loaded puzzle with the help of Bark, who darted the ball to out a Scarlet Knight sliding home. Following the weekend series against Rutgers, Wisconsin sits at 13-22 on the season and 2-7 in the Big Ten. The Badgers will next face the Ohio State Buckeyes in a conference matchup at the Goodman Softball Complex from April 12-14. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Molly Sheehan | The Daily Cardinal SPORTS Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights With the year coming to an end, it’s time to look at some moments that defined Wisconsin Badgers athletics. By Yadi Chavez December 8, 2024 | 2:36pm CST December marks a transitional period of sorts when it comes to collegiate sports. Some sports like football and soccer have seen their last action until 2025. Women’s volleyball is competing in the NCAA tournament, and the hockey and basketball season is starting to pick up as we head into the new year. While there is plenty to look forward to in the new year, it’s worthwhile to reminisce on a handful of achievements that Bucky gave us in 2024. Men’s soccer and their early season spark The Wisconsin Badgers men’s soccer team provided an exciting start to their season that hadn’t been seen in quite some time. With no votes in the national preseason poll before regular season play began, the Badgers would go on to prove that they deserved much more attention than anyone initially gave them. The Badgers ended September with a 6-1-1 record and were ranked No. 8 in the United Soccer Coaches Top 25 NCAA poll off the back of a youth movement happening in Madison. Freshman forward Dean Boltz exploded onto the national scene during the Badgers’ hot start. Boltz totaled eight goals and three assists in the first eight games of the Badgers season, giving him serious consideration for Freshman of the Year honors. But this blazing start wouldn’t last long, as the team would go 1-4-2 in the games following the start of October. This lackluster finish to the season narrowly denied a Big Ten Tournament bid for the Wisconsin Badgers. Despite the heartbreaking end of the season, there is much to be confident about when thinking about the overall picture. Boltz ended up being named the Big Ten Freshman of the Year and landed on the All-Big Ten Second team. Wisconsin now has the key goal of trying to maintain the components of this season to build on in 2025. If the early start showed us anything, this team has the pieces to be a real threat to the Big Ten and the entire nation if they can put it all together. Women’s soccer’s NCAA tournament run Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The 2024 Wisconsin Badgers women’s soccer program saw a continuation of the foundations laid in its 2023 season. Posting a 10-6-5 record in the regular season, the Badgers turned their game up in the last five games of the season, winning four of their last five. Similar to the men’s soccer team, the women’s soccer team had a prolific goal scorer who helped propel them to postseason success. Graduate student Aryssa Mahrt scored 10 goals alongside four assists on the season. On top of the Mahrt’s scoring boost, four other teammates had multiple goals on the season. Even if Mahrt stood out as the lead goal scorer, there were plenty of options for the team when looking for a goal. Although they lost in the first round of the Big Ten Tournament against Ohio State, the Badgers pushed on toward the fifth seed in the NCAA soccer tournament. Wisconsin jumped to a 2-0 lead over Maine in the first three minutes of their first-round matchup thanks to goals from Mahrt and senior Ashely Martinez. It would be smooth sailing from there, leaving with a 3-1 win when the final whistle blew. Next was a trip to Irvine, California, to face off against the No. 4 Virginia Cavaliers. The game was a tense one, with the two squads having to conduct a shootout to crown a winner after a stalemate in overtime. The Badgers made each of their four shots, and after the Cavaliers missed their second shot out of four, Wisconsin sealed the upset win. The Wisconsin Badgers were going to the Sweet Sixteen for the first time since 2021. In the Sweet Sixteen, the Badgers faced the No. 1 USC Trojans. Unfortunately for the team, this would be the end of their season. USC jumped out to a 3-0 lead, and despite a late goal from midfielder Dara Andringa, the game ended 3-1 for the Trojans. Aside from the sour end, the women’s program has much to appreciate when thinking about the 2024 season. They’ll have to retool a bit next year, but another NCAA Tournament run shouldn’t be out of the picture for this team. Men’s basketball beats Purdue in Big Ten Semifinal To round off the list, we’ve got an iconic game in Wisconsin men’s basketball lore. Before heading into the Big Ten Tournament in the 2023-24 season, the Badgers were on the brink of collapse. Losing eight of their last 11 games of the regular season, the hot start they saw to begin the year started to fade. And then the Big Ten Tournament started. A convincing win against Maryland in the first round set them up for a second-round matchup against the fourth-seed Northwestern Wildcats. After breaking away with a 70-61 win, it was time for the semifinal against a familiar foe. Wisconsin played Purdue twice in the regular season, both contests ending in close fashion. A combined 14-point differential in both games showed that the Badgers could keep up with the top-ranked Boilermakers. This matchup proved to be no different, as both teams posted the same number of points in each half. With the score tied at 70 apiece, the two went to overtime. After two made free throws by NBA lottery pick Zach Edey, Purdue was up by three with 46 seconds to go in overtime. The Badgers would have to rally quickly if they wanted to be in the Big Ten Championship. And rally they did. A Chucky Hepburn layup and an offensive foul committed by Purdue gave the Badgers the chance to take the lead with 22 seconds left. With the score being 75-74 Purdue, it was time for someone to make their moment. Junior Max Klesmit made the play of his life, hitting a floater with 4.8 seconds left in overtime to give the Badgers the lead. The clutch bucket proved to be enough, as Purdue simply didn’t have enough time to respond. The Badgers were moving on to the Big Ten Championship. After a shaky end to the regular season, The Wisconsin Badgers men’s basketball team showed resilience in the Big Ten Tournament that everyone had to respect. After their hot start this season, one could point to this game as the moment the Badgers really stepped into their own as a unit. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center
Courtesy of Sarah Best/Flickr SCIENCE Epic Systems holds Cap Times Idea Fest panel about future health care research Innovation from Crisis: What COVID-19 taught us about medical research By John Ernst September 23, 2024 | 11:16am CDT Epic Systems, a health care software company based in Verona, Wisconsin, held a virtual panel Sept. 17 to discuss their development of Cosmos, an online dataset, as well as their future research. The panel was part of The Capital Times Idea Fest, an annual weekly event hosted by the Madison newspaper since 2017 featuring seminars and interviews with politicians, journalists and other experts. Epic’s Vice President of Clinical Informatics Jackie Gerhart and Epic Research Lead Caleb Cox led the panel. Epic primarily focuses on health care software development and got their start with Electronic Health Records (EHRs). They now provide software for many major hospitals in the United States and around the world. MyChart, the Epic creation used by hundreds of millions of practitioners and patients to centralize medical records and data online, is one of the company’s most popular and widespread online offerings. Through the development of much of the software made to ease the health care process and surround the patient with information, Epic sought to use the data to help inform other patients through Cosmos and Epic Research, Gerhart said. Cosmos is an online dataset which Epic EHR customers can opt into to contribute de-identifying data allowing Epic to provide specialized care to one patient with a similar diagnosis to another patient in the dataset. Gerhart asserted that Cosmos would allow clinicians to solve “medical mysteries” and provide the best care for patients quickly by using the Cosmos data. Best Care Choices and Look-Alikes are two pieces of software Epic has developed through Cosmos to allow physicians to make decisions based on similar experiences and connect to other physicians in the Cosmos community about rare conditions. Epic Research builds off of Cosmos, using the data to publish studies on a variety of health studies that may not have been publicly available. “Quick, representative and available were the keys,” Gerhart said during the panel about the development of Epic Research. Once COVID-19 broke, Epic Research took its shape in response. One of the first studies Gerhart detailed during COVID-19 was the usage of ventilators. The company took clinical data, including how long patients were on ventilators and the severity of their illness, to figure out how to properly locate the limited amounts of ventilators. Epic researchers were able to discover that people could achieve lower oxygen saturations without needing to be on a ventilator and that they could use alternative care methods — thus, using the ventilators in a more intelligent way, according to Gerhart. The study triggered more research into COVID-19 but also into using the data to research a broad range of health issues. Cox described partnerships with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and being able to use their combined data to answer questions about Mpox and even strep throat, publishing the information in a matter of weeks. Throughout the panel, Gerhart and Cox delved into other studies Epic has done, including many of today’s pressing health issues such as fentanyl overdoses, the efficacy of telehealth visits and GLP-1s such as Ozempic. They said they aim to make this information and data easily available and understandable for everyday patients. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo courtesy of Nine Sols via IGDB. ARTS Nine Sols: A sun-kissed descent into cyberpunk cat chaos Developed and published by Red Candle Games, Nine Sols is a masterpiece in both metroidvania design and Chinese mythological integration. By Arin Chandra October 17, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In a world full of metroidvanias — action games with non-linear progression — and platformer games struggling to compete with the likes of Hollow Knight and Dead Cells, Red Candle Games created a home run of a game that successfully integrates difficult gameplay with a phenomenal narrative and an art style based in Daoist mythology. Released on May 29, 2024, Nine Sols certainly competes with the all-time greats of the genre and is one of the best games to come out this year. A Daoist dystopia Looking from the outside in, Nine Sols is a story about the Solarians, a race of cat-like creatures, and their fall from grace. Protagonist Yi is betrayed by his mentor in a near-death encounter but survived thanks to the Primordial Roots, the Solarians’ main energy source. After living with the captured humans (hilariously called “Apemen”) on the New Kunlun colony ship, Yi finally gets the opportunity to return to the ship prior and exact his revenge on the Nine Sols, the tyrannical leaders who are responsible for betraying him. In contrast with the game’s futuristic elements and its ruthlessly brilliant artistic decisions, such as complex cargo belts and high-end research labs that only anthropomorphic cats can make, it shows the player that the Solarians were once pushing all sorts of boundaries in science and technology while also maintaining their roots. The futuristic setting isn’t the only thing going for Nine Sols, as it also features a robust backdrop shrouded in Daoist concepts. Many characters in the game bear striking resemblances to mythological Chinese figures. One of the most important ones is Shuanshuan, a human who is an indirect reference to the Yellow Emperor — a mythological ruler who allegedly shaped the key precepts of Daoism — including the quest for long life and a harmonious society. The evolving relationship between Yi and Shuanshuan shows how time can allow friendships to prosper. Given the game’s Daoist influence, their relationship can also be interpreted as a divine blessing to the Yellow Emperor from a “higher being” in the Solarian Yi. Another example of Daoism’s influence in Nine Sols is Yi himself. Meant to represent the mythological archer Hou Yi, he uses a bow and a sword throughout the game. However, his story differs from that of Hou Yi based on the player’s choices. Yi either succumbs to his goal of revenge or creates a new one of saving the imprisoned humans, either deviating from or adhering to Hou Yi’s fate. But both stories both share the concept of “shooting down” the Nine Sols, or the Nine Suns, and leaving one of them to guide the common people. The story is a wondrous blend of future and fiction that never fails to surprise. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Cat souls” A game with an amazing story can still have bad gameplay to even it out to mediocrity. Luckily, Nine Sols doesn’t suffer from this problem. Yi starts off with some basic equipment — he can jump, dash and slash just like any other platformer character. But the real game changer in Nine Sols is the ability to deflect incoming attacks. All of this builds up Chi, which Yi can consume to hit an enemy with exploding talisman attacks for more damage. A combination of all of these basic elements already makes for an exceptionally nuanced gameplay experience. The best part about these abilities is that they are given to Yi when he needs them the most, allowing for many encounters to be the most challenging when you first see them. All of these mechanics are matched with well-designed enemies. Even the regular enemies the player encounters right at the beginning of the game can prove to be a big annoyance near the end. The boss battles serve as a worthy challenge for applying the skills the player has acquired throughout Yi’s journey. They start off decently enough but ramp up in quality quickly. The final boss is the ultimate test and feels like a flawless culmination of both skills and endurance, marking itself as one of the best in the entire genre. Combining intensity, power and culture, the soundtrack and audio design contribute to an addicting gameplay experience and further help to immerse the player in the world at hand. Nine Sols is an undeniably difficult game. Every death or setback is a learning opportunity. This is why many consider it a “Sekiro-like,” because of the uphill battle every encounter represents for the player. The most rewarding way to experience Nine Sols is to never give up. Pushing through the end of this experience has taught me a great deal about the potential of the metroidvania and platformer genres, and the best ones are always the ones that allow the players to keep pushing forward. Final thoughts Nine Sols weaves cyberpunk and mythological Chinese elements to create a unique world with many cultural aspects for players to discover, especially those tied to Daoist imagery and thematics. Its characters highlight a story of universal compassion and an allusion to the rise of mythological rulers in Eastern history with an art style to boot. And all of this is corroborated by a near-flawless gameplay system that encourages creativity and perseverance. Nine Sols is definitely one of the best metroidvanias ever made, and it is perhaps a true contender for Game of the Year. Overall Rating: 10/10 - Masterpiece Length: 12-24 hours Nine Sols is out now on Steam and all major consoles. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations Aaron Vieth will investigate Students For Justice in Palestine for allegedly violating Expressive Activity policy during their Dec. 5 protest on behalf of the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards. By Sreejita Patra December 6, 2024 | 12:38am CST The Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards (OSCCS) launched an investigation Thursday into University of Wisconsin-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) for allegedly violating the university’s Expressive Activity Policy during their protest at a Board of Regents meeting earlier that morning. A source familiar with SJP shared documents with The Daily Cardinal that said the organization may have violated the rules in the RSO Code of Conduct through the “use of university facilities and grounds,” “obstruct[ing] orderly conduct” and “fail[ing] to comply” with administration when around 50 protesters disrupted the Board of Regents meeting Thursday morning demanding the university financially and socially divest from Israel. Investigating Officer Aaron Vieth said in the documents the organization will face “further sanctions up to and including termination of RSO status” if he recommends them to be guilty of violations in probation requirements in effect since October and RSO Code of Conduct policy. Assistant Dean of Students and OSCCS Director Tonya Schmidt previously said in September that under normal circumstances she would recommend SJP be suspended as an RSO, but because campus administration and SJP struck a May agreement to end the pro-Palestine encampment, the university considered this a “mitigating factor” and approved a 10-month probation instead of suspension on Oct. 3, 2024. SJP is responsible for scheduling an investigatory interview by 4:30 p.m. on Dec. 15, 2024 and will have seven calendar days after Vieth’s recommendation to request a hearing for the case. If no hearing is requested by this deadline, Vieth’s recommendation will become the university’s final decision. Vieth said external judicial bodies may also investigate SJP or its members about the protest, and if the organization disbands during the disciplinary process, it may be added to the “Student Organizations Not in Good Standing” letter. “If this happens and Students for Justice in Palestine would like to become registered as a student organization again in the future, the organization will have to petition for reinstatement no matter what the outcome of the disciplinary process is,” Vieth said in the documents. University spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Friday that “UW supports the right to free expression within the bounds of the law and campus policy” and that the investigation and arrests were due to “disruptive behaviors” and violation of the Expressive Activity Policy. SJP spokesperson Dahlia Saba defended the protest and told the Cardinal Thursday that university police “brutally assaulted protesters and arrested 19 people seemingly at random.” WKOW-27 reported Thursday that protesters said police “forcibly slammed” a protester against a wall while following instructions to walk away. “SJP protested the business and finance meeting of the Board of Regents to demand that they disclose their investments and, in accordance with Wisconsin law, divest from companies complicit in Israeli apartheid,” Saba said. “Now, the university is again putting SJP through a disciplinary process to punish us for calling out the university’s unethical and illegal investment practices.” Wrists of protesters bleed due to tight zip ties used when they were arrested for breaking UW-Madison protest policy at the Board of Regents meeting at Gordon on Dec. 5, 2024. Courtesy of UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine/Instagram Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email SJP posted photos Friday of protesters’ wrists bleeding due to restraints after their arrests. UWPD spokesperson Marc Lovicott told the Cardinal Friday the police did not assault protesters and instead restrained them with handcuffs or “disposable flex-cuffs” which are similar to large zip ties. He said an officer accidentally “nicked the wrist” of a student while releasing them, but UWPD staff treated the injury. “This is a common tactic with this type of group we saw in May as well, where these just ridiculous, false claims are made,” Lovicott said. “I think the videos on social media speak for themselves as to how we tried to get protesters to clear the room so the meeting could legally go on as was needed.” UW-Milwaukee student and co-chair of Students for a Democratic Society Audari Tamayo was among the 19 people arrested earlier today. He called the investigation “bogus” and said UW-Madison’s Expressive Activity Policy, which puts restrictions on “expressive activity” within 25 feet of university buildings, essentially criminalizes protest on campus. “Across the country, SJP chapters are getting banned and investigated for standing up, fighting back and not taking no for an answer,” Tamayo told the Cardinal Thursday. “When all is said and done, the universities and anybody who restricted the ability of the community to protest are going to be on the wrong side of history. It’s not going to make us stop.” UW-Madison community and environmental sociology professor Samer Alatout, faculty advisor for SJP, said the university is “absolutely disgraceful” for “mak[ing] the issue about student disruption while a genocide is raging on in Gaza.” He said Palestinians are being “asked to disappear *poof* silently and without a whimper.” “Students are requesting for transparency of investment decisions, for UW Foundation to follow state’s laws which reject profiting from investments in companies that condone “discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, and sex,” Alatout said. “Genocide, as a matter of fact, violates all those provisions.” This story was updated at 1:36 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 6, 2024 to include Lucas' statement, corrections on RSO policy and additional claims from protesters surrounding UWPD conduct. This story was updated at 3:00 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 6 to include Lovicott’s statement and response to protesters' claims. College Editor Mary Bosch contributed reporting to this story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Sreejita PatraSreejita Patra is a senior staff writer and the former summer ad sales manager for The Daily Cardinal. She has written for breaking news, campus news and arts and has done extensive reporting on the 2024 presidential race. She also covered the Oregon Village Board for the Oregon Observer. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Alex Crawford. ARTS Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour The Internet sensation-turned country star will headline the Majestic Theater Dec. 8. By Bryna Goeking December 3, 2024 | 1:45pm CST It’s been six years since the “Walmart Yodel Kid” stole the internet’s hearts, and now Mason Ramsey has grown up, redefining the limits of oldies and country music in his debut album, “I’ll See You In My Dreams” and his “Falls Into Place” tour. And he has done the impossible — staying relevant beyond his 15 minutes of online fame. This year alone, he released his debut album, a Christmas EP, began his first headline tour and was featured on the soundtrack of “Twisters.” Despite critical acclaim across his projects, it’s a love of music, not fame, that drives his success. His music blends his lifetime love of 1950s and 1960s country music with an Americana essence. After taking a few years off, his sound has grown up with him, carrying a soulful nostalgia beyond his age in songs like “Blue Over You” and “Cowboys Always Come Home.” Days before his stop in Madison at the Majestic Theater on Dec. 8, Mason Ramsey spoke with The Daily Cardinal to reflect on his origins, inspirations and what lies ahead. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. Can you take us back to the Walmart video that went viral? How did it feel to become an internet sensation almost overnight at such a young age? It was definitely something I didn’t expect. I didn't know I was going viral when everything was going on because I wasn't raised on the Internet, so I wasn't able to figure out what was going on until a week later. My cousin got a hold of my grandparents, and she was telling them my video had taken off, and all these crazy things started happening. Like “The Ellen Show,” the “Today” show, “The Tonight Show,” all the places started calling, and they wanted me on. It was a big moment, a pretty crazy moment for me. Honestly, I didn't realize how big it was, but now that I look back, I think that the reason behind it is because my love for music is everything, and I just love doing music. I really didn't think of it as being any different. It was just more opportunities for me to get out there and to sing. Is it difficult to redefine yourself in the public eye after such a viral moment? Do you embrace the “Walmart yodel boy” identity or reject it? The past is something to remember, but, moving on to the future, I have to make sure people know me, the real me, and know my love for music and the artists that really inspired me to make my first album. I would say it was not easy to do at first. It took a little bit of time to transition from the Walmart thing to what I am now. I think everything is going very smoothly. You started as a young performer. How has growing up in the spotlight shaped you personally and professionally? When I first got started in the industry, I didn't really have a lot of songs I felt like fit me very well. I was just trying to figure out my style, and I thought, well, if it's gonna be hard for me to make the kind of music that I want to make, then I probably have to go with this. And during COVID, that turned out not to be the case. Actually, I am able to make and create the music that I want to make, it just took some time. But I feel like now that I have an idea and kind of have a direction of where I want to go for the future, I think I want to stick with it. I’m just super happy [with] how everything’s turned out, and I’m super thankful for my fans and my audience for supporting me throughout the years. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Who are some of your musical influences? I’m very inspired by artists such as Ricky Nelson, Johnny Cash, Roy Orbison and Elvis Presley. I actually picked up on a new inspiration, there's a guy by the name of Gary Stewart. He’s pretty cool; he’s got some cool music I really like. That's the great thing about music, it just keeps growing. You keep expanding your tastes and things you’re interested in. I’m always finding new music, and that’s why I have the influences and taste like I do. I just keep going. Your album features many collaborations with your producer, Dan Ferndandez. How did you two develop such a unique sound? I actually had a call with him before we started writing together and structuring things. But I just kind of talked about my musical influences, and I told them who they were. And I told him my story of being raised on Hank Williams music all throughout my life. I was looking to do the kind of the 50s, 60s, 70s thing throwback. He helped me find my style. I went in with a couple of songs and or future songs I had written down, he helped put the music and stuff to it and that's how “Blue Over You” and all of the other songs off the album came along. This has been a big year for you: turning 18, releasing your debut album, a Christmas EP and headlining your first tour. What has been the highlight, and what are you looking forward to? Man, I’ve had so many highlights this year. Tour, my first album, having a, having a song on the “Twisters” soundtrack, which is really cool. I’ve had so many of them this year, and I’m just really excited to be back out there doing music and stuff. Next year, we’ve already got things in plan, we’re super excited about some of the new material that we're making already in the studio. So it’s gonna be really fun. You joined Lana Del Rey in June for a performance of “Blue Over You.” What is your favorite Lana Del Rey song? I like her song, “Did you know that there’s a tunnel under Ocean Blvd.” I got chills just being on stage singing with her. I don't know how to explain the feeling, other than I got chills in the best way. It was one of those things where you had to be there to really get the full experience. But it felt amazing just being in that environment at Fenway Park. Everything was perfect. Arts editor Rebekah Irby contributed reporting to this article. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Maddie Schwartz has done it all for Wisconsin, but now she doesn’t have to Senior pitcher Maddie Schwartz has cemented herself among Wisconsin’s best pitchers in recent history. Now, as good as ever, Schwartz hopes to end her career on a high note as a deeper bullpen begins to fill around her. By Justin Alpert March 9, 2023 | 2:00am CST On April 29, 2022, Wisconsin’s Maddie Schwartz and Penn State’s Bailey Parshall — who led the women’s softball conference with a 1.68 ERA — engaged in an epic pitcher’s duel. Through nine innings, the late-season contest remained scoreless. Badger left fielder Morgan Kummer homered to give Wisconsin a 1-0 lead in the top of the 10th. Schwartz, 103 pitches into her 29th appearance of the season, induced three straight groundouts in the bottom of the inning to secure the Friday victory. The senior’s 21st win of 2022 was arguably her most impressive: 10 innings and 110 pitches, allowing only one hit and one walk. With eight strikeouts and 20 groundouts, the Nittany Lions spent 10 innings mashing the ball into the dirt, if they made any contact at all. Schwartz had surely earned herself a restful Saturday as Wisconsin continued the weekend series with a double-header. But not quite. Schwartz was back in the circle for a 3 p.m. first pitch. In an efficient 41 pitches, she allowed one hit over four scoreless innings, tallying yet another victory as Wisconsin crushed Penn State, 8-1. Taylor Wolfram Schwartz might have gone the distance in the blowout win had she not been scheduled to start the nightcap as well. Her third and final start of the series was a tough-luck loss, as she allowed four runs (one earned) over 6.2 innings. Leading 3-2 and one out from a third-straight win, Schwartz watched third baseman Skylar Sirdashney’s error unravel into a walk-off rally for the Nittany Lions. Wisconsin’s ace right-hander hurled 251 pitches in a 25-hour span. For Schwartz, it was just another weekend in the office. At season’s end, her 213 innings ranked third in the Big Ten and her 2.46 ERA ranked ninth. Alongside Schwartz on the Badger pitching staff were Tessa Magnanimo (54.1 innings, 3.35 ERA) and Ava Justman (62.1, 3.93). When it mattered most, however, whether a series opener, a must-win game or a late-inning jam, coach Yvette Healy trusted Schwartz most in the circle. “They’ve never really thought about not using me in any situation,” Schwartz said. “I worked so hard through the middle of my career that I got to the point where I didn’t want anyone else to have the ball.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Born a Badger The Chanhassen, Minnesota native didn’t need much convincing to become a Badger. Schwartz, whose grandfather and great-grandfather attended the University of Wisconsin-Madison, grew up rooting for Wisconsin sports. Healy’s recruiting efforts sealed the deal, but Madison attracted Schwartz for more reasons than pitching. “I put all my eggs in one basket,” Schwartz said. “That obviously isn’t smart for recruiting, but this is where I really wanted to be. I knew if softball wasn’t a factor, I wanted to be here for school. As soon as it was an option, I made the easy decision.” Schwartz’s omnipresence in the circle for Wisconsin in 2022 wasn’t handed to her. Rather, it was the product of her learning and developing under older veteran pitchers. She credits ex-Badger Kaitlyn Menz, who threw 637 innings from 2017-20 with 66 wins and a 2.55 ERA, with helping her grow as a young pitcher. While Menz appeared in 36 games (25 starts) in 2019, the freshman Schwartz made a strong first impression. She posted a 1.64 ERA and held opponents to a .239 average in 55.1 innings, and she also threw a shutout in one of her three starts. Throughout that debut season, Schwartz envisioned herself as more than a bullpen arm. “I tried to model some of my work ethic around people like [Menz],” Schwartz said. “I had my time learning and waiting in the wings. It was kind of how I went about my business in the offseason — I was hungry to earn that starting role.” Schwartz made eight appearances, all in relief, through the first 24 games of 2020. Her 2.50 ERA and 17:2 K:BB suggested she’d be starting games soon, but COVID-19 wiped out the rest of the schedule. Taylor Wolfram A year later, she finally emerged as the ace and as Menz’s successor, carrying Wisconsin’s pitching staff with 156.2 innings and a career-best 2.23 ERA. By every metric — innings, batters faced, starts, complete games and more — Schwartz was one of the premier workhorses in the Big Ten. The rubber-armed righty continued in 2022 with head-turning weekends like the one at Penn State. Making 41 appearances (30 starts) in Wisconsin’s 51-game schedule, Schwartz willed the Badgers to a 30-21 record and an NCAA Tournament appearance. There, she logged a save in the first-round victory over Canisius before struggling in a close victory over Georgia Tech. What about Schwartz has allowed her to pitch so often, yet so well, for the Badgers since 2021? Physical preparation and adaptability Healy doesn’t hesitate to put Schwartz, who has no track record of injuries, in the circle time and time again. That doesn’t mean Schwartz is immune to fatigue, though. “It definitely becomes a grind toward the end of the season,” she said. “I’m just so lucky to get the ball in those big situations, so I never really think ‘my arm’s hurting’ or anything like that.” In games she doesn’t start, Schwartz must stay loose throughout and get ready quickly when called upon. On Feb. 25 versus North Carolina, for example, Magnanimo entered for the final out of the seventh inning but allowed two baserunners. Schwartz took over and induced a game-ending groundout. “It’s definitely a little more rushed,” Schwartz said of her preparation as a reliever. “You can’t just check out — you have to keep your body moving and not let soreness set in. I’ve found a routine that works for me. Our coaches are pretty good about telling us when they see us coming in, but it can definitely switch on a dime.” Although Schwartz wasn’t satisfied with her early-career relief role, she admits it helped her save innings for this massive late-career workload. Composure under pressure While Schwartz was confident as a freshman and sophomore, she felt she lacked the composure to battle through high-pressure situations, she said. Once again, she looked up to Menz as a model for excellence. “I didn’t understand how she was so stoic and even-keeled out there,” Schwartz reflected. “That was something I really longed for because I felt like every time I was out there I was trying not to mess up. That’s obviously not how you play well and find success.” Taylor Wolfram Now, in jams like the seventh inning versus North Carolina, Schwartz can effectively control her emotions. “With all my years of experience, it’s kind of who I am now,” she said. A calculated tactical approach Pitchers generally favor either riseballs or dropballs. Riseballs start high and, thanks to backspin, continue rising. This allows them to elude the upward path of swings and generate whiffs. Dropballs, on the other hand, better align with bat paths and generate weak contact when thrown low. Velocity, release point and other traits make one strategy preferable for a given pitcher, but both can be effective: Riseballs lead to strikeouts, dropballs lead to grounders. Schwartz came to Madison as a riseball pitcher. To pitch so many innings and so many games, though, she needed more contact and quicker outs. Those 20 groundouts in the 10-inning Penn State masterpiece? They were a direct product of Schwartz’s newer dropball approach. “Our pitching staff and our coaching staff’s philosophy is no big innings — putting up zeroes or ones, not getting too deep into counts,” Schwartz explained. “I pitch to contact, which obviously isn’t as shiny and pretty [as strikeouts], but it has definitely worked for us.” She compliments her dropball with a curve, an offspeed pitch which catches hitters out in front and leads to feeble contact or whiffs. In her fifth and final season, Schwartz continues to experiment with new offerings. “Usually, early in your career you take away pitches, then as you gain confidence with your few pitches, you add back to your repertoire,” Schwartz said. “I get to play around a lot now, and I have a lot more tools than I had my freshman year. It’s been fun to see how I’ve evolved as a pitcher here.” Relief on the roster Schwartz is striking out 0.63 batters per inning pitched through 36.2 innings in 2023 — right in line with her career rate of 0.65. This year especially, the Badgers don’t need her to be a bat-missing flamethrower. That’s thanks to the arrival of freshman right-hander Paytn Monticelli, whose 70 mph heater has helped her strike out 1.15 batters per inning in the first 41 frames of her career. Most notably, Monticelli struck out 13 Tar Heels in a Feb. 24 complete game. “She’s been a great addition to the staff,” Schwartz said of Monticelli. “She’s doing a great job for us, and she brings so much energy to the field. I’m really excited to see how she can keep contributing to our growth as a program.” Unlike Schwartz in 2019, Monticelli didn’t have to wait long to become a regular starter for Wisconsin. Four of the freshman’s first seven appearances have been starts, and it looks like Monticelli’s here to stay. Schwartz, in contrast, made three starts in 24 total appearances in 2019. Gabi Salo has also emerged to bolster Wisconsin’s pitching depth. The junior has already set a new career-high with 20.1 innings and boasts a 0.69 ERA with 23 strikeouts. A deep pitching staff presents numerous advantages. For one, it keeps everyone more rested throughout the three-month regular season. “Toward the end of last year we were so excited to go play [in the NCAA Tournament], but it’s hard not to run out of gas,” Schwartz said. “It’s a grind of a season, and this will give us more options going into the postseason. We’ve always wanted to win a Big Ten Championship, and having extra arms is definitely how you do it.” Taylor Wolfram The diversity of arms, with Monticelli’s swing-and-miss stuff and Schwartz’s contact-welcoming dropballs, gives Wisconsin’s coaches more options to match up with opposing hitters. Consider an imposing power hitter who feasts on low pitches. In a crucial late-game situation, Healy can bring in Monticelli to throw high riseballs and get a strikeout. Or, with runners in scoring position, Wisconsin could use Schwartz to induce a double-play ball. The best pitching staffs feature a variety of approaches. In that sense, the Badgers’ group is as complete as it’s been during Schwartz’s career. That said, the heightened competition for innings in 2023 hasn’t detracted from the close-knit nature of Wisconsin’s pitching staff. “We’re all in each other’s corner — we think each of us can get it done on any given day,” Schwartz said. “There’s never any ‘Why is she pitching?’ or things like that because we’ve all bought into each other’s journeys as pitchers. We all do better when we all do better.” A leader by example Menz’s stoicism rubbed off on Schwartz, who was once a shy freshman battling for innings. Other leaders during Schwartz’s career include the vocal Ally Miklesh, who graduated from the program in 2022, and Kayla Konwent, Wisconsin’s all-time home-run leader currently in her final season. Because of her immeasurable role the last couple years, Schwartz has found herself in that group. “I’m not necessarily the most vocal, but as a pitcher, I lead the team whether I like it or not,” she said. “It’s been amazing to learn from people like Kayla and Ally. We have a bunch of leaders on the team who lead in different ways, and that’s what makes a good team.” Taylor Wolfram Could Schwartz, who has coached youth softball during summers in Minnesota, have a future in softball beyond her Badger career? She believes so. If not coaching, she hopes to work with sports in some capacity — perhaps applying her consumer behavior and marketplace studies degree to the business side of sports. “There’s a lot of stuff that makes me happy, but coaching and being around the girls is something I’ve found really fulfilling,” Schwartz said. “I hope I can find a career that ties all my interests together.” Finishing strong Opening the season with four straight losses in Mexico was disappointing for the Badgers, but it opened their eyes to areas needing improvement. Lineup adjustments, improved defense and Monticelli’s rapid development have righted the ship as Wisconsin progresses through its early-season schedule. “[Mexico] definitely changed how we go about practice and go about our business,” Schwartz said. “We know nothing’s going to be easy. We have a lot of youth, so people are just shaking out the jitters. I think we’ll hit our stride going into Big Tens.” Wisconsin begins its gauntlet of conference matchups March 24 at Michigan State. The regular season ends May 7, leading into the Big Ten Tournament. After that, if the Badgers have their way, they’ll make a trip to the NCAA Tournament. Injuries and performance will force adjustments to Wisconsin’s depth chart between now and the postseason. When the lights are brightest in May, however, Schwartz will be in the circle. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80
Photo by Bailey Krause | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Campus early voting rooms change due to long lines, statewide software error The Madison Clerk’s Office moved early voting at Memorial Union to a larger room because of long wait times and an issue with printing ballot envelopes. By Mary Bosch and Noe Goldhaber October 25, 2024 | 9:05pm CDT The Madison Clerk's Office and the University of Wisconsin-Madison moved early in-person voting to a larger room at Memorial Union after an error in statewide software and high early voter turnout caused lines as long as two hours. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal the Memorial Union voting room moved from a smaller room near the Rathskeller to Tripp Commons on Friday and will move to the Main Lounge during early voting next week. Union South’s voting location temporarily moved to near the art galleries because of homecoming celebrations Friday and will return to the second floor near the theater, Govindarajan said. Because of “higher than expected turnout,” the WisVote server used by clerks across the state lagged and caused an error with printing labels that go on ballot envelopes, according to the Wisconsin Elections Commission. “Normally it takes two seconds to print out these labels that are needed for the ballots for accuracy, and it's just taking a lot longer than that,” Madison Communications Manager Dylan Brogan said. “That's really the primary driver [of long wait times].” Now, state-level clerks are restarting the system every few hours, and it’s running faster, WEC Chair Ann Jacobs said in a statement on Twitter. “Wisconsin is updating us and doing everything they can to alleviate the problem,” Brogan said. “We wish it wasn't happening either.” Govindarajan said he anticipated wait times to be shorter because of the room change at Memorial Union. “I think for future elections, Tripp Commons should be the default area. Voting shouldn't be relegated to the area by the market — the closet. I don't really know what to call that area, but you can substitute closet for whatever it's called,” Govindarajan said. 4,776 in-person absentee ballots were cast Friday across Madison, which Brogan said is the highest number at this point in the election cycle and almost double what is expected at this point in the election. The WEC reported a statewide 40% increase for in-person absentee voting compared to the same period in 2020. Poll workers have been working late hours into the night to register ballots as the system is more efficient at that time, Brogan said. They are working to update records as quickly as possible so voters can ensure their vote was cast. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Despite the delays, record-high early voting reflects students' eagerness to have their voices heard at the ballot box, Govindarajan said. “We were asking if people [on Library Mall] have a plan to vote, and a lot of people are saying they've already voted, they're going to vote right now, or they'll be voting on Election Day,” Govindarajan said. “There's not many people saying they don't have a plan to vote.” Early in-person absentee voting started on Tuesday and will continue until the Sunday before Election Day. Madison residents can vote at any voting location across the city, including Memorial Union, Union South, many Madison libraries or community centers. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 Noe GoldhaberNoe Goldhaber is the college news editor and former copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She is a Statistics and Journalism major and has specialized on a wide range of campus topics including protests, campus labor, student housing, free speech and campus administration. She has done data analysis and visualization for the Cardinal on a number of stories. Follow her on Twitter at @noegoldhaber. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Shake Shack will open its second Wisconsin location at the Hilldale Shopping Center in 2020. Photo by Courtesy of Aaronr12300 through Creative Commons | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Hilldale welcomes four new businesses opening in old AMC theater Four new businesses are set to open in late 2024 and 2025, replacing the old AMC Theatre 6 at Hilldale Shopping Center. By Marin Rosen November 20, 2024 | 2:00am CST Hilldale Shopping Center will welcome the first of four new businesses to open in the old AMC Theatre space this weekend, Hilldale announced in October. AMC Theatre 6 closed in December 2022, allowing for new businesses to take over the space. That month, the Madison Common Council unanimously approved a proposal to redevelop Hilldale that included repurposing the 40,000-square-foot theater into a two-story retail center. Nearly two years later, retailers Warby Parker, Sephora, Sweetgreen and Jaxen Grey will fill the repurposed space at Hilldale Shopping Center in the coming months. Optometrist Warby Parker is the first of the four businesses to open, with its grand opening set for Nov. 23. They are relocating from their previous spot on 401 State St. Following the city’s approval of the renovation in December 2022, Hilldale general manager Nanci Horn told the Cap Times the shopping center is “thrilled that the Madison Common Council has moved forward with an approval of our expansion plan for Hilldale.” “The property has been a beloved community destination for over 60 years, and our goal has always been to continually enhance its offerings, inclusive of a diverse merchandise mix, restaurant uses and an array of community-focused events,” Horn said. At the grand opening, Warby Parker is giving out a free custom tote bag with any eyewear purchase while supplies last and 15% when shoppers buy two or more pairs of prescription eyeglasses or sunglasses. Jaxen Grey, a Minneapolis based men’s retail store, is set to open in February 2025. The Hilldale location will be the first to open in Wisconsin. Jaxen Grey manager Oliver Swingen told WMTV on Tuesday the city of Madison’s “dynamic range of people” makes it a nice fit for the store. “With the variety of clothes we carry, there is something for everyone, so I think Madison will enjoy having us here, and we will enjoy being here as well,” Swingen said. Sephora and Sweetgreen locations are set to open in 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Kalli Anderson | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why A weakening of public health protections under a second Trump presidency, particularly surrounding vaccines, would put University of Wisconsin-Madison residents at higher risk of illness, a Madison hospital nurse told The Daily Cardinal. By Clara Strecker December 16, 2024 | 2:00am CST Colin Gillis, a nurse, works in an inpatient unit at a hospital in Madison. As a proud member of Service Employees International Union Wisconsin, he is concerned about President-elect Donald Trump’s incoming administration and what it means for the health care industry. Gillis fears Trump’s appointment of Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. as the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Secretary, because he is a known anti-vaccine advocate, he said. Gillis said he worries Kennedy will have severe effects on several health care programs, including Food and Drug Administration (FDA) policy and the Affordable Care Act. “Patients are our number one concern,” Gillis told The Daily Cardinal. “Ensuring that patients are safe and that they have access to what they need to get better, that’s my true north in absolutely everything.” Concerns with RFK’s anti-vaccine rhetoric Kennedy has long opposed the FDA’s work on vaccines, despite now changing his stance on the issue. He previously said “there’s no vaccine that is safe and effective” and claimed vaccines lead to autism, a myth that has long been debunked by researchers. “The fact that RFK, who by all accounts is a so-called anti-vaxxer, could be pulling the levers of the federal agencies that help us maintain access to vaccines and develop new vaccines is terrifying,” Gilllis said. Gillis has observed “vaccine hesitancy” among patients, family members and health care workers. With a Kennedy appointment, he believes “anti-vax attitudes” will be “more pronounced” throughout Wisconsin. “The future is unwritten,” Gillis said. “It gives me serious concern because [Kennedy] said a lot of stupid things about vaccines.” Gillis said he is also concerned with the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s loose vaccine policy, as it makes the safeguard that vaccines provide by combating communicable diseases nonexistent. UW-Madison does not have specific vaccine requirements for students, but University Health Services stresses the importance of students staying up to date on their vaccinations. “If more students are coming to Wisconsin without vaccines, the risk of preventable disease like measles goes up,” Gillis said. “A lot of people in our community who live in close quarters are students, and if they are not required to have vaccines, and more people aren’t getting vaccinated, then that exacerbates an already existing public health risk.” Vaccine administration is key to greatly reducing illness and chronic diseases in both children and adults, Gillis said. Many non-health care workers do not grasp the magnitude of how vaccines and antibiotics work to combat communicable diseases and allow people to recover from them, he said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email RFK’s war on the FDA Kennedy claimed in late October that the “FDA’s war on public health is about to end” and suggested a proposal to “clear out entire departments” at the FDA. But Gillis does not believe the FDA is conducting a war on public health. “RFK, based on some of the things that he’s said about vaccines and the medical profession itself, is the one who would be waging war on public health,” Gillis said. “If he is somehow able to take an axe to the FDA and actually reduce its capacity to monitor the safety of our food and drugs, that could be horrific. That could have really frightening effects on our health care system.” Gillis said an FDA clearout would lead to a spike in people taking drugs not indicative of their condition, citing spiking numbers of people trying to use Ivermectin in Wisconsin to treat COVID-19 during the pandemic. He also does not have “confidence” that Kennedy will “heed the advice that he should from people within the FDA,” he said. Affordable Care Act remains under attack The fate of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) remains uncertain. Kennedy has focused less on Medicare and the ACA, while Trump and other Republicans have threatened to repeal it. More than 220,000 Wisconsinites are signed up for ACA benefits, and another 1.5 million receive Medicaid services. If the ACA and Medicaid are cut, people could lose services or coverage altogether. In the state, at least 883,000 people with pre-existing conditions could lose protections. Gillis said it would be “a human tragedy” if lawmakers overturned the ACA. Gillis said this confirms what he already suspected: many Wisconsinites are dependent on the ACA for access to health care without putting themselves at financial risk. “If you add financial uncertainty to that medical emergency, it only magnifies the emotional consequences of what is already a terrible tragedy in some individuals life,” Gillis said. “When I have to watch that happen, when I’m part of the system that is making a medical emergency worse by adding financial anxiety to it, I feel it’s moral injury… it causes you distress because you’re complicit in something that is causing harm to others.” Gillis is afraid that if the ACA is taken away, the feeling of “moral injury” will make “fewer people want to go into health care,” and is even more worried that people will “leave health care.” In a state that projects a deficit of between 12,000 and 19,000 nurses by 2040, that could be extremely consequential. “We see a lot of tragedy when we work in healthcare,” Gillis said. “I don’t want to see any more than I have to.” But with Dane County Circuit Court Judge Jacob Frost striking down more than 60 sections of Wisconsin’s 2011 Act 10, law that curbed collective bargaining rights for public sector unions, earlier this month, Gillis hopes health care workers will have a tool — unionization — they can use to protect both themselves and their patients. “That gives me a little bit of hope,” Gillis said. “Because then we have a tool that we once had to protect ourselves and our patients restored to us.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Clara StreckerClara Strecker is a copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She also covers state news. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal
Photo by Cameron Lane-Flehinger | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison Metropolitan School District referendums pass Two referendums related to Madison Metropolitan School District funding passed Tuesday night. By Joseph Panzer November 6, 2024 | 5:12pm CST Two Madison Metropolitan School District referendums passed with 69.4% and 71.9%, respectively, at 100% of precincts reporting as of Wednesday morning. The first referendum, a $100 million operational referendum paid over four years, will provide for hiring more educators, full-day 4-K programs and mental health initiatives districtwide. The second referendum, a $507 million facility referendum paid over 23 years, will pay for updating elementary and middle schools in the district, according to MMSD’s website. The operational referendum will also allow MMSD to overhaul multilingual education across schools and expand middle school career exploration opportunities through an increase in extracurricular activities and other educational resources. The facility referendum will result in 26 facilities over 60 years old being refurbished with modern heating and plumbing in addition to STEM labs, new libraries and shared spaces. The Wisconsin Policy Forum (WPF) estimated that these two referenda will increase property tax bills by $1,376 for Madison homeowners. Edell Fiedel, the senior director of communications for MMSD, previously told The Daily Cardinal that the district faces a $30.2 million deficit for 2023-25 because the state budget did not keep pace with inflation. A report from WPF also assessed funding concerns for MMSD stemming from the district no longer being able to use revenue from a 2020 referendum or federal COVID-19 relief due to the expiration of the Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) fund. In the past year, 92 different school referenda were on ballots across Wisconsin as a result of what MMSD characterizes as the state’s inability to properly fund school districts through limits on the amount of state aid and local taxes that a district can receive. A press release from the Office of the Mayor said that the referendum will balance the budget until 2030 with the potential for special changes addressing budget gaps to be implemented in 2027. The Cardinal reached out to MMSD. This is a developing story. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of Sarah Best/Flickr SCIENCE Epic Systems holds Cap Times Idea Fest panel about future health care research Innovation from Crisis: What COVID-19 taught us about medical research By John Ernst September 23, 2024 | 11:16am CDT Epic Systems, a health care software company based in Verona, Wisconsin, held a virtual panel Sept. 17 to discuss their development of Cosmos, an online dataset, as well as their future research. The panel was part of The Capital Times Idea Fest, an annual weekly event hosted by the Madison newspaper since 2017 featuring seminars and interviews with politicians, journalists and other experts. Epic’s Vice President of Clinical Informatics Jackie Gerhart and Epic Research Lead Caleb Cox led the panel. Epic primarily focuses on health care software development and got their start with Electronic Health Records (EHRs). They now provide software for many major hospitals in the United States and around the world. MyChart, the Epic creation used by hundreds of millions of practitioners and patients to centralize medical records and data online, is one of the company’s most popular and widespread online offerings. Through the development of much of the software made to ease the health care process and surround the patient with information, Epic sought to use the data to help inform other patients through Cosmos and Epic Research, Gerhart said. Cosmos is an online dataset which Epic EHR customers can opt into to contribute de-identifying data allowing Epic to provide specialized care to one patient with a similar diagnosis to another patient in the dataset. Gerhart asserted that Cosmos would allow clinicians to solve “medical mysteries” and provide the best care for patients quickly by using the Cosmos data. Best Care Choices and Look-Alikes are two pieces of software Epic has developed through Cosmos to allow physicians to make decisions based on similar experiences and connect to other physicians in the Cosmos community about rare conditions. Epic Research builds off of Cosmos, using the data to publish studies on a variety of health studies that may not have been publicly available. “Quick, representative and available were the keys,” Gerhart said during the panel about the development of Epic Research. Once COVID-19 broke, Epic Research took its shape in response. One of the first studies Gerhart detailed during COVID-19 was the usage of ventilators. The company took clinical data, including how long patients were on ventilators and the severity of their illness, to figure out how to properly locate the limited amounts of ventilators. Epic researchers were able to discover that people could achieve lower oxygen saturations without needing to be on a ventilator and that they could use alternative care methods — thus, using the ventilators in a more intelligent way, according to Gerhart. The study triggered more research into COVID-19 but also into using the data to research a broad range of health issues. Cox described partnerships with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and being able to use their combined data to answer questions about Mpox and even strep throat, publishing the information in a matter of weeks. Throughout the panel, Gerhart and Cox delved into other studies Epic has done, including many of today’s pressing health issues such as fentanyl overdoses, the efficacy of telehealth visits and GLP-1s such as Ozempic. They said they aim to make this information and data easily available and understandable for everyday patients. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin's location at 3706 Orin Road on Madison's east side. Photo by Tyler Katzenberger | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH UW-Madison's female students brace for a Trump presidency as IUD appointments surge nationally Female UW-Madison students brace for a Trump presidency as IUD appointments surge nationally. By Annika Bereny December 5, 2024 | 6:00am CST For many women on campus who voted for Vice President Kamala Harris, the next few days were filled with anxiety, worry and a decision to get an intrauterine device. For Kat Sattel, a sophomore at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, waking up Wednesday morning meant calling her mother to discuss contraceptive options. “I had a phone call with my mom where I discussed how fearful I was,” Sattel said. “And by that afternoon, I had made an appointment with UHS to have a consultation about [getting an IUD].” Demand for IUDs and other forms of birth control increased nearly 22% in the 30 days after President-elect Donald Trump’s 2016 election, a 2019 study found. This election has shown similar, if not elevated, results of the same phenomenon. Searches for “IUD appointment” increased 100% on Nov. 5, and searches for ‘planned parenthood’ jumped 40% in the 24 hours after the election. Sattel cited the potential repeal of the Affordable Care Act by the Trump administration, an Obama administration policy that makes the birth control pill free, as the main reason for her decision. “It is not an easy expense, to have to pay for birth control every three months,” Sattel said. “The reason that I want to get an IUD is because of how long it lasts and that it would be longer than any presidential term.” Sexual health company Winx Health reported a 966% increase in sales of their emergency contraceptive pill in the 60 hours following the election. Planned Parenthood reported appointments for IUDs across the nation increased by 760% in the 24 hours after the election, birth control implants saw a 350% increase and vasectomy appointments increased by 1200%. In Wisconsin, there has long been worry about a ban on emergency contraception, but the elections of Democratic Gov. Tony Evers and liberal-leaning Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Janet Protasiewicz have kept them at bay. In Wisconsin, calls to Planned Parenthood have increased since the election, Analiese Eicher, director of communications for Planned Parenthood Advocates of Wisconsin told The Daily Cardinal. “Our community-facing folks and our health centers are receiving a lot of questions, and there's a lot of uncertainty,” she said. UW-Madison junior Annabel Allen said she decided to get an IUD earlier in the summer because of the uncertainty surrounding who would win the election. “‘I should definitely just get an IUD with the upcoming election,’” Allen said she remembered thinking. “‘Because I don't want to take any chances.’” Over the summer, Allen, a Louisiana native, visited her home of New Orleans and said it made her feel the stakes of the election even more. Louisiana is currently a state with a full abortion ban, except in cases where the mother’s life is in danger or the pregnancy is “medically futile.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Being home and being in Louisiana obviously makes those issues feel a little bit more present,” Allen said. “When Roe v. Wade got overturned, it was like Planned Parenthood disappeared off the face of the earth at home, and I just think about all the women who don't get that reproductive health care anymore, which is really disappointing and scary.” But Allen had her IUD placed incorrectly and experienced severe side effects, such as hormonal mood swings, irregular bleeding and painful cramps for the six months she had it before ultimately removing it. A 2014 UW-Stout study reported 78% of women who had never given birth experienced moderate to severe pain during their IUD placement. Just months ago, in late August, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated their recommendations and now urge health care providers to counsel patients about pain management before the procedure. “You can just feel your body trying to reject it, which is such an odd feeling,” Allen said. “It made me sad, because I was like, ‘Why do I have to do this?’ I'm glad that I have this option, and it was easy and it's accessible, but I just was like, ‘Why do I even have to do this in the first place?’” Dissonance between the severe pain felt from IUDs and the benefits it provides has led to disillusionment in some cases. But birth control has always been a form of reproductive autonomy in the face of what many women see as male apathy to the consequences of unprotected sex. And, with young male voters’ rightward shift this election, more women are getting IUDs as a way to protect themselves and their reproductive rights. “Prior to the election, I was speaking to a lot of guys our age who go to this university, and they were very secretive and almost ashamed of if they were voting for Trump,” Sattel said. “The second that he won the election, they’ve come out of the woodwork saying blatantly misogynistic, blatantly homophobic things. It's really scary to know that they feel like they have that power and feel able to get away with that without any sort of repercussions.” One viral tweet that circulated after the election and has become a phrase used to troll women upset about the results of the election came from neo-Nazi Nick Fuentes reading, “Your body, my choice. Forever.” Allen said, like Sattel, she’s noticed men saying extremely “disrespectful and dehumanizing” statements online since Trump’s election. “Clearly, I've been stuck in this little bubble,” Allen said. “There are lots of people and lots of men out there who have no respect for women or their bodies.” But the election results and the emboldening of the anti-choice cause does not mean hope is lost, Eicher said. PPWI resumed performing abortions in Milwaukee and Madison clinics in late 2023, despite the 1848 ban still being in effect. “We are open and provide this full spectrum of reproductive and sexual health care, including abortion. The Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin doors remain open,” Eicher said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
The UW-Madison law building photographed on Dec. 4, 2024. Photo by Emma Schieffer | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Instructors from conservative law firm will teach UW law course, drawing student criticism The University of Wisconsin–Madison Law School hired Skylar Croy and Daniel Lennington to teach a constitutional law course this upcoming spring semester. Some students, who attended clerkship programs WILL sued to alter diversity requirements, disagree By Wanwa Omot December 5, 2024 | 5:00am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison law student Mary Berg was shocked and upset when she learned attorneys from conservative law firm the Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty (WILL), Skylar Croy and Daniel Lennington, would be teaching a Constitutional Amendments course next spring. The course — “Selected Problems in Constitutional Law: Constitutional Litigation" — focuses on the Reconstruction Amendments: the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments of the United States Constitution. Students will draw expertise from landmark cases such as Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) and Brown v. Board of Education (1954), according to a draft syllabus obtained by The Daily Cardinal. Berg says the hiring of Croy by the law school is “astounding” because Croy “intentionally puts students in harm’s way,” according to her statement sent to UW Law School deans obtained by the Cardinal. Berg participated in the Wisconsin State Bar’s Diversity Clerkship Program, a summer employment program for law students. WILL sued the State Bar in December 2023, claiming the program was unconstitutional for discriminating against students on the basis of race and other “immutable characteristics” in their diversity definition. Croy told WPR in a statement defeating “unconstitutional DEI (diversity, equity and inclusion) programs” has become the WILL’s area of expertise. The firm specializes in culture war topics and is also suing the federal government over the McNair Scholarship for underrepresented students. During the lawsuit, partially redacted documents including student’s personal statements, resumes and contact information — including Berg’s — were made available on WILL’s website. “That kind of freaked me out more than anything. Given the atmosphere surrounding these conversations…I think it’s pretty easy for you and I to conceptualize the kind of harassment,” Berg said. “Some people want to enroll in this course and really use this as a test of their ideological strength. I am not one of those people.” The litigation of the constitutionality of programs like the Diversity Clerkship Program has increased since the U.S. Supreme Court rejected affirmative action in June 2023. The State Bar and WILL settled in April 2024, with the program continuing with a modified version of the definition of diversity which includes more language of the diversity of experiences and viewpoints. Croy and Lennigton have criticized the law school directly, demanding it remove content from the school’s “Re-Orientation” program, a mandatory program for all first-year law students. WILL argued that the school was “pushing racist ideology on law students.” Despite their criticism of the law school, Croy says he has a lot of respect for the law school and the course will be neutral in viewpoints. Students can expect a “run-of-the-mill” course, learning about procedural matters when arguing in cases involving the Reconstruction Amendments that outlawed slavery, granted citizenship to those born or naturalized in the United States and prohibited federal and state governments from denying citizen’s right to vote “on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” respectively. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I think it would be very good for students to try to get in a class like this with instructors that they have some concerns about, because if your goal in life is to someday go to court and argue against organizations like WILL, what better way to prep for that?” Croy said. Berg said she does not have a problem with the course itself or that attorneys from a conservative law firm will teach but rather the fact that it’s being taught by Croy and Lennington, who specifically published Berg’s and others’ personal records, obtained through a public records request. UW-Madison spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Croy and Lennington were fully qualified to teach the course. “We are committed to fostering a diversity of viewpoints, and having these instructors teach this course furthers that goal,” Lucas said. Other law students like Samantha Crane plan to take the course next semester and look forward to learning more about constitutional law. “Why are UW Law students upset about a reconstruction amendments course being taught this spring?,” Crane said in a Tweet. “If people are upset about it, I would say that I think people should take the class,” Crane said. Croy and Lennington have previously crossed paths with UW Law School. Croy graduated in 2019 second in his class from UW Law School, Order of the Coif, and served as the editor-in-chief of the Wisconsin Law Review. This will be both Croy and Lennington’s first time teaching at UW Law School. Editor's Note: This story was last updated at 11:30 a.m. on Dec. 8, 2024. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Father Enan Zelinski leads St. Paul’s congregation through worship in a Sunday evening Mass service on October 20, 2024. Photo by Ella Hanley | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS St. Paul’s pastors encourage voting at mass. They call it a Catholic principle As pastors of St. Paul’s, Fathers Eric Sternberg and Enan Zelinski believe their responsibility in the upcoming election is to be sources of information for Catholic students struggling to make a decision this election season. Here’s why. By Ella Hanley October 25, 2024 | 7:00am CDT In the chapel of St. Paul’s Catholic Student Center, light organ music plays as members shuffle in quietly, kneeling and crossing themselves before sitting down. The lights are dimmed as the procession enters the chapel, and the priest, Father Enan Zelinski, enters in long, green robes. Incense pours out of a gold thurible suspended from gold chains and gently swung by a member of the procession. The smoke wafts up through the church while the choir sings praises and the congregation joins, their voices echoing. Zelinski leads the group in song before beginning his message. As pastors of St. Paul’s, Zelinski and Father Eric Sternberg believe their responsibility in the upcoming election is to be sources of information for Catholic students struggling with making a decision. This particular service, the first of two before the election, was used to educate students on core principles from which to guide their ballot decisions. “We don't preach particular people or particular parties,” Zelinski said during this Sunday’s evening service. “We preach eternal principles, principles of the church that we as members asked to put into practice when we go to vote for our elected officials.” Mary Bosch Father Eric Sternberg speaks with The Daily Cardinal in an interview on October 15, 2024. Sternberg told The Daily Cardinal in an interview he considers himself to be “separate” from the secular world, but that’s not to say he isn’t living in it. He finds “great freedom” in remaining nonpartisan, and yet Sternberg underscored the importance of participating in the upcoming election. “I’d argue there are a number of Catholics saying to themselves, ‘maybe I sit this one out,’” Sternberg said. “We’re here to remind you of the principles of which you are to guide yourself with. And then, remind you that you have a duty to vote.” Sternberg believes it is unrealistic to expect to find a political candidate who fully aligns with Catholic principles, and discernment becomes essential when a candidate agrees with ideology on one issue but differs on another. While Catholics may feel backed into a corner this election season, their duty to vote is one rooted in an understanding of the Catholic “common good,” according to Zelinski. Sternberg told the Cardinal that Catholics understand participating in elections to be one of the ways people can seek the common good in society. He also said that Catholics find “no political home” in current politicians or politics. Sternberg advises evaluating candidates based on a hierarchy of core principles, at the root of which is the right of a human person, which he says is “distinctly different” from individual rights. “If we don't understand, as a society, respect for the person and for their inalienable rights, first among them being the right to life, everything else will fail. The first fundamental element of the common good is the respect of the person,” Zelinksi said during the service. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Catholics find themselves at a crossroads when evaluating candidates. For example, Sternberg noted the debate around border control to be particularly split. The church states clearly that lawfully organized states have the right to control who enters and leaves — meaning the state also has the right to return people who entered undocumented. Still, another Catholic virtue is hospitality to strangers, which can lead to tension between upholding laws and responding compassionately to those seeking refuge. “How can I maintain a just approach to immigrants within my society without maintaining integrity of the border?” Sternberg said. The question has been an ongoing debate for years. He asserts that Catholics have a duty to be “reasonable in the choices they make.” Both sides could provide a reasonable justification for supporting their respective positions, he argued. However, Sternberg said some methods used to maintain border integrity, such as camps and mass deportations, are unacceptable. And while Sternberg encourages civil discourse among members of St. Paul’s, he places significant importance on respectful dialogue and encourages his congregation to engage in “vigorous debates” grounded in reason and civility. “The attitude around St. Paul’s, as close as it is to the election, has actually been very peaceful. I've heard lots of students having conversations about ideas, and some of those conversations get very fired up,” Sternberg said. “But we’ve set the tone — If you want to have a screaming, shouting match, go to the bar.” Indeed, the energy inside the church was quiet and respectful as members prayed “that those who govern will defend true justice.” Members of the congregation sat silently after the sermon in a moment of reflection and prayer before resuming worship through song as the organ’s chords blended with the voices of the choir. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
A stack of CD cases. Photo courtesy of Madison Moris Photo by Madison Moris | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE The Rewind: On this day in music history By Madison Moris October 3, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Stevie Wonder said in his song “Sir Duke,” “Music is a world within itself; it's a language we all understand.” This is what ‘The Rewind’ is all about. Music carries different meanings for everyone, and it is really cool to dive deeper into it. 'The Rewind' was a niche I developed in the spring at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire where I discussed album releases, single drops and anything else musically related for the corresponding week in history. Without further ado, The Rewind: University of Wisconsin-Madison edition. “Songs In The Key Of Life” On Sept. 28, 1976, Stevie Wonder released his 18th studio album “Songs In The Key Of Life.” The album was only the third to debut number one on the Billboard Pop Albums Chart and the first album by an American artist to do so. The album features some of his arguably most recognizable songs including “Isn’t She Lovely,” “Contusion” and “Sir Duke.” This is definitely an album everyone must listen to in their lifetime. There’s a reason Olivia Pope praised the album in “Scandal”. “Body Paint” The Arctic Monkeys released their single “Body Paint” on Sept. 29, 2022, which was later featured on their seventh studio album “The Car.” This album was the first from the English band since 2018’s “Tranquility Base Hotel + Casino.” This song and album really pushed the Arctic Monkeys in a different direction. Their earlier works captured teenage angst in the indie-rock genre, but “The Car” pushed back on this. As someone who drained their bank account to see AM on their 2023 North American Tour, it was a different experience than other tours I’ve read about. This album has a “lounge-act” feel which allows the band to experiment without the pressures of the music industry. My dad, who went to the concert with me, described it as “Kings of Leon performing as a lounge-act with David Coverdale of Whitesnake in an English accent.” While I would have described it as an amazing experience seeing my all time favorite band perform, my dad had a different opinion. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The death of Tom Petty On Oct. 2, 2017, the world lost award-winning musician Tom Petty at 66 years old. Petty found major success in his solo career and in his stints in Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, Mudcrutch and The Traveling Wilburys. Petty initially became interested in rock music after meeting Elvis Presely in 1961 and later went on to win three Grammy awards. I will be eternally jealous my dad saw Petty live several times in his home state of Florida. “The Crane Wife” The Decemberists released their fourth album, “The Crane Wife,” on Oct. 3, 2006. This is one of my favorite albums by the Portland, Oregon band. It is based on an old Japanese folk tale. The story talks about a man who finds a wounded crane and nurses it back to health. When released, the bird turned into a woman and offered to be the man’s wife. The album is filled with whimsical lore, which I love. “Soy Pablo” On Oct. 5, 2018, Norwegian music project Boy Pablo released their debut album “Soy Pablo.” This album is on the shorter side, clocking in at just over 21 minutes, making it a quick but enjoyable listening experience. Its style is similar to artists like Dayglow, with a warm pop bubbly feeling. It sounds as if it should be in a soundtrack for a coming-of-age movie. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
PODCAST Cardinal Call: UW-Madison Ranks 6th in 2024 National Ranking of Research Funding By Oliver Gerharz and Ted Hyngstrom December 10, 2024 | 6:48pm CST Your browser does not support the audio element. Cardinal Call: UW-Madison Ranks 6th in 2024 National Ranking of Research Funding This week host Oliver Gerharz speaks to Daily Cardinal Staff Writer Ted Hyngstrom about his story “UW-Madison climbs research ranking to sixth in 2024” in a discussion of UW–Madison’s status as a top research university. Articles in this week’s “campus news in brief” segment: UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations - Srijeeta Patra Instructors from conservative law firm will teach UW law course, drawing student criticism - Wanwa Omot Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Cardinal Call: Campus LGBTQ Community Letter Calls Out UW-Madison Fall Semester Recap and Preview Mid Season Check-In
Photo by Scholarship Media | The Daily Cardinal SPONSORED Enterprise Search for Businesses: A Guide In the vast sea of digital information, businesses are finding it increasingly challenging to navigate and extract the relevant data they need for decision-making, collaboration, and staying competitive. By Scholarship Media July 2, 2024 | 2:15pm CDT In the vast sea of digital information, businesses are finding it increasingly challenging to navigate and extract the relevant data they need for decision-making, collaboration, and staying competitive. Enterprise search technology provides a robust solution to this challenge, streamlining the access to vast repositories of information. With its ability to fuel productivity and enhance data discovery, it's no wonder why many companies are turning towards enterprise search platforms. In this article, we will dive into what enterprise search entails, its benefits, and how to harness its potential effectively within your organization. Understanding enterprise search: what it is and how it works Enterprise search is a powerful technology that allows users within an organization to retrieve structured and unstructured data from multiple sources through a single search query. Whether it's documents, emails, database records, or multimedia content, the tool indexes a wide range of data types to deliver comprehensive search results. At its core, enterprise search systems are designed to understand the context and relevance of user queries. Advanced algorithms and natural language processing enable the platform to interpret the intent behind searches, making the retrieval process more intuitive and efficient. The underlying architecture of these systems often incorporates sophisticated technologies such as machine learning and artificial intelligence. These technologies continually learn from user interactions to improve search accuracy and the relevance of returned results over time. Key benefits of implementing enterprise search solutions One of the primary benefits of implementing an enterprise search solution is the significant boost in employee productivity it provides. With instant access to information, employees spend less time looking for data and more time on critical tasks that add value to the business. Improved decision-making is another advantage, as enterprise search platforms deliver relevant information that can support and inform strategic business decisions. Quick and reliable data retrieval ensures that decision-makers have all the necessary insights at their fingertips. Beyond efficiency, enterprise search platforms contribute to better knowledge management. By breaking down silos and aggregating information, these tools promote a culture of information sharing that can drive innovation and foster collaboration among teams. Essential features to look for in an enterprise search system When evaluating an enterprise search platform, several features and capabilities are crucial. Scalability stands at the forefront, as the platform should be able to handle growing amounts of data and users without performance degradation. User experience is equally important. A well-designed interface with intuitive navigation and search functionalities can significantly impact the adoption and success of the platform within the organization. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Moreover, the ability to integrate with existing systems and data sources is essential for a seamless flow of information. The platform should support the aggregation of data from various repositories, including cloud-based services and on-premise solutions. Lastly, future-proofing your investment through a platform that incorporates AI and machine learning can set the stage for continuous improvement and adaptability as your organization's needs evolve. Measuring the success of your search strategy To truly gauge the impact of an enterprise search system, measurement and analysis are key. Metrics such as user adoption rates, the frequency of search usage, and the relevancy of search results can provide insight into how well the platform is performing. Looking at the effect on workplace productivity and time saved across departments can also offer a tangible measure of success. Organizations often find that a reduction in time spent searching correlates with an increase in productivity and employee satisfaction. Feedback from end-users is invaluable for continuous improvement. Gathering input on the usability and effectiveness of the search platform can shed light on areas that may require enhancements or additional training. Finally, aligning the performance metrics of the search platform with broader business objectives helps in quantifying its contribution to the company's success. Whether facilitating faster decision-making or enabling innovation, the strategic benefits should resonate with the organization's goals. Overall, the implementation of a search platform can transform how businesses access and utilize information, provided that the system is chosen thoughtfully and integrated with careful attention to the organization's specific needs. By addressing the challenges and measuring success along the way, companies can ensure they derive maximum value from their investment in enterprise search technologies. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More The ultimate guide to home warranty benefits Why you should never drive under the influence Best Practices for Successfully Developing and Deploying a Knowledge Management System
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S SOCCER Women’s soccer heads to the NCAA Sweet 16 for the first time since 2021 Wisconsin beat Virginia 4-2 in penalty kicks, and will go on to face No.1 seed USC on Sunday. By Gabriella Hartlaub November 24, 2024 | 1:32pm CST The Wisconsin women’s soccer team beat the fourth seeded University of Virginia in penalty kicks on Friday to earn a spot in the the Sweet 16 of the 2024 NCAA Tournament for the first time since 2021. Despite logging no shots on goal, the Badgers took down Virginia in penalty kicks 4-2 after double overtime. In a game that will no doubt go down in program history as nothing short of miraculous, Wisconsin made every penalty kick that they attempted. Sophomore Ella Ottey made the final penalty kick to win the game. After 110 minutes of play, the score remained 0-0 due in no small part to Wisconsin goalkeeper Drew Stover, who had five saves for the game. It was Stover’s effort that saved the game for the Badgers as they struggled offensively against Virginia. If any of Virginia's five shots on goal went in, the Badgers’ season would’ve been done before overtime even started. It was also Stover who gave the Badgers the upper hand in the penalty kick shootout when she blocked Virginia's first shot attempt, which eventually led to Wisconsin’s win. Stover’s clean sheet was one of the only bright spots for a game in which the Badgers struggled offensively. Throughout the season, the Badgers have consistently outshot their opponents by large margins, but they struggled to get past the Virginia defense throughout the game, ending the game with six shots to Virginia's nine. For a team that has averaged 11.9 shots per game, to have only six shots is usually an insurmountable error, especially during tournament play. As the Badgers move on to face the No.1 seed USC, these kinds of errors will be certain death for the Badgers’ Elite Eight hopes. When Wisconsin and USC last met in September, the Badgers lost 0-3 in a game where they also had no shots on goal and USC had twice the amount of overall shots. While a victory in this game shows that miracles are possible, it will take nothing short of that to push the Badgers over USC and on to the Elite Eight. The Badgers play the Trojans Sunday Nov. 24 at 6 p.m. CST on ESPN+. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
East High/Wikimedia Commons STATE NEWS Wisconsin public school districts increasingly turn to referendums for funding School districts across Wisconsin have asked for $5.9 billion in funding through referendums this year because of inadequate funding from the state. By Zoey Elwood November 20, 2024 | 2:00am CST This year, a record number of school district referendums appeared on ballots, asking voters to approve an increase in property taxes as state aid continues to fall behind inflation. Out of the 421 Wisconsin school districts, at least 192 posed referendum questions for their residents asking for a total of $5.9 billion for school funding. In total, 241 school referendums were asked throughout the year, 138 occurring in the August primary and Nov. 5 election and 103 during the February primary and April general election. Unofficial election results found that voters from 145 districts approved 169 of these ballot questions, resulting in the approval of a record total of $4.4 billion in new funds for school districts, $3.3 billion of which will come from debt. Wisconsin public schools are faced with declining enrollment because of a drop in birth rates, leading to closures and consolidations as schools try to reduce costs. Since budgets are decided based on student enrollment, a decrease in students results in reduced funding. Wisconsin State Superintendent Jill Underly said taxpayers should not be “disproportionately” asked to fund basic school operations and called for greater state funding for K-12 education during the announcement of her budget proposal Nov. 11. “We need to fix Wisconsin's outdated School Finance system, which is based in part on decade old formulas that were never intended to adequately fund schools,” Underly said. “The deficits which have ensued have caused more and more districts to rely on referendums to make ends meet.” To reduce school referendums on ballots, Underly has requested more than $3 billion in additional funding from Gov. Tony Evers and Republican lawmakers to support the needs of students, staff and schools. Her budget proposal includes raising the state reimbursement rate for special education from its current rate of 32% to 75% in Fiscal Year 2026 and 90% by Fiscal Year 2027. The state currently provides schools with less than one third of the necessary funding needed for these legally mandated services, forcing schools to make cuts in student programming to cover these costs, according to Underly. Her proposal will begin with increasing per-pupil revenue limits by $425 in Fiscal Year 2026 and indexing future revenue limits to inflation. To limit property tax increases, the plan will increase state general aid. These adjustments will cap property tax increases at an average of 1.5% over the biennium. Revenue limits determine how much funding Wisconsin public schools receive from property taxes and state aid as well as how much schools can spend. The proposal will also expand per-pupil categorical aid programs by $100 over the next two fiscal years and will provide a 20% bump for students living in poverty. Additionally, Underly’s plan outlines funding for universal school meals, teacher recruitment and retention, enhancing mental health services and improving literacy resources. Altogether, the total investment to Wisconsin K-12 schools will reach $4 billion over the next two years. “The bottom line is, if we want our communities and our state to move forward, we can and must invest in public education,” said Underly in an announcement. “It really is that simple.” In the past, Republicans have rejected increased state funding for Wisconsin public schools. Evers will introduce the 2025-27 executive budget early next year. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S HOCKEY Wisconsin men’s hockey keeps unbeaten streak alive in season’s first home sweep Wisconsin triumphs over Alaska Anchorage 7-1 on Friday and 2-1 in a shootout on Saturday. By Abigail Bures December 3, 2024 | 12:51pm CST The Wisconsin men’s hockey team’s (5-8-1) energy built on the first sweep of the season against Penn State carried them through their bye week and into the Thanksgiving weekend series against Alaska Anchorage (2-10-2). Coming off a rough start to the season, junior forward Kyle Kukkonen noted the team has been working on closing out games strong. “I take pride in doing the little things and working together…It’s kind of a thing that we preach throughout the week,” Kukkonen said. “Do your job and do little things, and that leads to controlling games and learning how to win games.” Wisconsin triumphs over Seawolves in 7-1 win Wisconsin beat Alaska Anchorage 7-1 in their highest-scoring game of the season so far on Friday night at the Kohl Center. Kukkonen, a transfer out of Michigan Tech, and freshman forward Gavin Morrissey both scored two goals and together assisted on three other goals that night to make strides in their first season as Badgers. Ryland Mosley kicked off the game for the Badgers with an even-strength goal and only three minutes, 56 seconds on the clock. Morrissey started the play from behind the net and brought the puck up to the corner where he traded places with sophomore forward Quinn Finley. A pass from Finley was then dumped to Mosley, who had great positioning directly in front of the net and finished it off for the Badgers. Kukkonen made his third goal of the season on a penalty shot. The junior forward advanced on the Seawolves’ goaltender Greg Orosz from the left side before attacking the right side of the goal. With these two opportunities and a strong defense, the Badgers ended the first period leading 2-0. Finley scored first in the second period after a blocked shot on goal was rebounded his way for Wisconsin’s first — but not last — score of the night on a power play. Shortly after, Wisconsin forward Jack Horbach received a five-minute major penalty for hitting from behind, but the Badgers ran the clock down and maintained their 3-0 lead with only four players on the ice. Morrissey followed in Finley’s footsteps and scored the second power-play goal of the night for Wisconsin. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “He brings it every day,” head coach Mike Hastings said of Morrissey's consistency this season. “The game rewards you when you put the work in consistently.” Just three minutes later, Morrissey scored the next goal with Mosely on the assist. The freshman has four goals and 11 assists so far this season. “I’ve got two great players on my line, and finding chemistry with those guys has been big for me,” Morrissey said. “That’s why me and those guys have been ready to go and I think have still done pretty well for the start of the season.” In the second period, Wisconsin scored one goal and Alaska the other, leaving the game 5-1 with Wisconsin ahead at the end of the period. Kukkonen fired the puck just past the glove of Orosz and into the top right corner of the net off a deflected shot from junior forward Christian Fitzgerald. 26 seconds later, the Seawolves made their first and only goal of the night with an even-strength goal by freshman forward Dylan Contreras. But that single goal wasn’t enough for a Seawolves comeback. During a quiet third period, only one goal, made by Wisconsin graduate student forward Cody Laskosky, was scored, ending the game 7-1 for Wisconsin. A narrow game two The Badgers managed to win narrowly in an overtime game that ended in a shootout on Saturday night featuring a Badgers Beyond Borders event. Wisconsin goaltender Tommy Scarfone held the net for the Badgers Saturday night, looking to hold the Seawolves as well as he did on Friday. Alaska Anchorage mixed up their roster and replaced Orosz with freshman goaltender Tyler Krivtsov. A power-play goal by Alaska Anchorage freshman forward Ryan Johnson held Wisconsin 0-1 from the end of the second period until almost the end of the third. With a minute and a half left on the clock in the third, Wisconsin pulled Scarfone to put six men on the ice in an attempt to tie the game. It paid off as Mosley sunk a goal with only 19 seconds of game time left. Wisconsin remained offensively strong for much of the first overtime period. The Badgers had 10 shots compared to the Seawolves’ one. Two shootout goals from Wisconsin’s Finley and Mosley won the competition for the Badgers. Anchorage had three attempted shootout goals, with only senior forward Maximilion Helgeson scoring on Scarfone. Anchorage served eight minutes of penalties during this game, but Wisconsin wasn’t able to capitalize on any of them, putting its’ goals-opportunities for power plays this season at 11-52. Four-game win streak The Badgers fought back against their losing record in this series and now have four-game unbeaten run. Two Wisconsin players, Ryland Mosley and Gavin Morrissey, had a four-point game Friday night, the first for a Badger since Finley in January. Kukkonen’s penalty goal was the first opportunity Wisconsin had at a penalty shot since Finley's against Ohio State last season. “I thought we kept playing offense,” Hastings said in a post-game press conference. “We possessed the puck, we made some plays, but we didn’t do it in areas to kick Alaska into transition.” Saturday night marked higher point streaks for both Finley and Mosley. Beginning during the Minnesota game on Nov. 8, Finley has a career-high six-game point streak with four goals and seven assists. Mosley is on a five-game point streak with five goals and four assists. Captain Owen Lindmark said he was proud of his success during faceoffs on Saturday. With a game record of 22-27, Lindmark had the most opportunities of any Badger that night in the circles. “I just try to take ownership in the faceoff circle,” Lindmark said. “Being in my sixth year here, I think that that’s probably the strongest area of my game, and I take a lot of pride in any chance I can get to help the team out. That was in the faceoff circle tonight.” After 14 games, Wisconsin’s record is now 5-8-1. Up next: Wisconsin plays their final home games of the fall semester on Dec. 6 and Dec. 7 against No. 1 Michigan State. The annual UW Teddy Toss will happen during Friday night’s game. Fans can bring teddy bears and donate them to Toy For Tots during the Teddy Toss. Friday night is also Winter Wonderland-themed, and fans are encouraged to wear holiday apparel. Saturday night honors former Badger Joe Pavelski, who recently retired after 18 years in the NHL. Pavelski played for Badgers from 2004 to 2006 and was drafted to the San Jose Sharks, where he played for 13 years and served four of those as captain. At Wisconsin, Pavelski was part of the championship team in 2006 and scored 101 points, the ninth Badger to score over 100 points during their first two seasons. The puck drops at 7 p.m. both nights. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Courtesy of Ryan Clemens OPINION In defense of Chappell Roan, she did not need to endorse Kamala Harris When you stand behind a candidate, you stand behind their platform. Chappell Roan wants to change it instead. By Wesley Hoy October 3, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Last August, Chappell Roan decided to set boundaries with her fans. She told them to treat her like a normal person, and she received endless support. Her message even sparked discussions within the pop fandom on the normalization of parasocial relationships, a psychological relationship where a fan feels like they know their celebrity idol. It forced people to reckon with the idea that celebrities are human too and that it’s unhealthy to idolize a stranger to the point of obsession. For once, it seemed like the internet learned that their obsessive actions do hurt celebrities’ personal, private lives. But when Roan created two TikTok videos a few days ago stating she would not endorse the Harris-Walz ticket, it created an internet firestorm, and many of the same people who previously lauded Roan’s boundary-setting turned on her. Roan is justified in not endorsing the Harris-Walz ticket. Criticism of their platform and its policies makes their campaign stronger. It gives a politician greater insight into what their constituents want from them if they win office. The harassment Roan received after this non-endorsement has noticeably caused a drain on her mental health, something that she already struggles with. Days before this controversy, she announced she was diagnosed with severe depression. The harassment led to her canceling her performance at the All Things Go festival on September 28-29. Some argue she is hurting the LGBTQ community with her lack of endorsement. They have called into question her support of gay people and transgender rights. This argument is completely out of touch with surveys of the LGBTQ community in this country. More than 75% of LGBTQ adults believe that Democrats are not doing enough for the LGBTQ community, according to a recent Data for Progress poll. The word “transgender” was only spoken twice at the Democratic National Convention this summer even though transgender rights are increasingly under attack. Additionally, the Biden administration came out with a statement opposing gender-affirming surgery for minors last June. The trend of LGBTQ+ people feeling alienated by present-day Democrats is one that Chappell Roan speaks to in her video. Immigration is another valid reason why Roan might not lend her support to this Democratic ticket. In recent years, the Democrats have taken a much harder stance on immigration, alienating one of the fastest-growing groups of potential voters. They did this after polls showed the majority of the country now wants a decrease in U.S. immigration. This is a very recent example of Democrats throwing a minority community under the bus for political gains. As anti-trans hate spreads in the United States, what’s to say that the Democratic Party wouldn’t throw transgender people under the bus for political gains too? In her skepticism of the Harris-Walz campaign, Roan is advocating for the Democratic Party to shift toward her opinions. And her opinions are shared by many voters. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Due to Israel’s ongoing war and humanitarian situation in Gaza, and the current invasion of Lebanon, there’s plenty of reason for Americans, especially Arab Americans, to be upset with the Biden-Harris administration. Only 29.4% of Muslims in the swing states of Wisconsin, Michigan and Arizona plan to vote for the Harris-Walz ticket, according to recent polling by the Council on Islamic Relations. Many remain undecided or plan on voting for a third party, either for Green Party candidate Jill Stein or Justice for All Party candidate Cornel West. While 77% of Democrats say they support an arms embargo on Israel, the Biden-Harris administration refuses to change their actions on this issue. That’s worth being frustrated about. Imagine, for instance, that Harris is against something you care deeply for — whether it’s reproductive rights, marriage equality or something else. If you had the power, wouldn’t you rally together a coalition of voters? Wouldn’t you show Harris the votes she will lose if she backs the wrong policy? I know I would. That’s exactly what Arab Americans have been doing, and it’s what Chappell Roan is doing too. Yes, the Republican Party would be worse for the LGBTQ+ community, for immigration and for addressing the crisis in Gaza. But we shouldn’t feel obligated to vote for the lesser of two evils. Democratic voters should fight to move their party closer to the policies supported by their constituents. So, yes, for someone who cares deeply about Gaza, LGBTQ+ rights, climate change, and the future of young Americans, it’s justifiable for Chappell Roan to demand more from the Democratic Party. One more thing. Before Chappell Roan came out with these statements saying she would not endorse Harris-Walz, she was pestered by online Democrats and politicians to endorse Harris. Democratic politicians used her songs to make political content. Harris-Walz made a hat that resembled some of her merch. All of this was a subtle way of trying to get her endorsement. She shouldn’t have been forced to make a statement in the first place. Of course, celebrities should have a good influence on their fans, but Chappell Roan is not a politician, and she shouldn’t be pressured into making political statements. Nor should anyone. If you aren’t pressuring all of your friends to virtuously support Harris online, you shouldn’t be pressuring someone you don’t know to do the same. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Underly's budget proposal is a bold step toward strengthening Wisconsin's public education Underly’s plan, prioritizing special education, per-student funding increases and property tax relief, is a substantial and badly needed investment in the future of Wisconsin. By Maya Morvis November 21, 2024 | 5:00am CST Jill Underly, Wisconsin’s state superintendent, recently unveiled a budget proposal that could make a significant difference for public education in Wisconsin. The proposal, totaling over $3 billion in new funding, aims to address funding gaps that have limited school resources for students, teachers and communities. Underly’s plan, which prioritizes special education, per-student funding increases, property tax relief and grants, is a substantial and badly needed investment in the future of Wisconsin. This proposal represents a chance to build a stronger public education system that will keep pace with rising costs. Underly's plan ties funding increases to inflation, making it easier for schools to maintain quality education without needing local tax increases or frequent referendums to cover basic expenses. By offering state-level support, this proposal will relieve financial pressure on local communities, making funding for education more stable and reliable. It will also advance equitable and inclusive education by significantly increasing special education funding, which would help schools meet state mandates while supporting students with disabilities. For students, these changes would mean better access to essential resources, especially for those in special education programs and low-income households. The proposed increase in the special education reimbursement rate — from 32% to 90% over three years — would provide much-needed funding to cover costs for critical services. This increase would allow districts to offer better support to students with disabilities, enhancing their educational experience and opportunities. The rise in per-student funding would mean schools can improve or maintain essential services, technology, classroom resources and educational programs that benefit all students. Families would also feel the positive effects of this plan. By capping property tax increases to an average of 1.5% over the next two years, Underly’s proposal would help control local tax rates while ensuring that schools still receive necessary funding. For families in low-income brackets, additional financial support for their children in schools through per-student aid increases and the extra 20% in funding for students in poverty would help reduce inequities and offer better educational opportunities. Programs funded through the Out-of-School-Time Grant, aimed at reducing chronic absenteeism, would provide added support to keep students engaged, which is particularly helpful for working families who rely on after-school programs. While Underly's proposal seems promising, some critics argue the increase in state-level funding could shift too much responsibility away from local communities. They argue that local school districts should have more control over their budgets and how money is allocated, rather than relying heavily on state-imposed funding structures. Additionally, some have raised concerns the plan's reliance on capping property taxes may not be sustainable in the long run, potentially leading to future budget deficits or the need for future tax increases to balance the books. While the proposal aims to provide more equitable education, the overall economic feasibility of funding such initiatives without raising taxes in the future remains a contentious issue. However, Underly’s proposal could lead to long-term benefits for Wisconsin’s educational system that outweigh these concerns. With sustainable funding, better resources for students and more financial support for families, the state can work toward creating a more equitable, well-resourced and inclusive education system. This investment in education is an investment in Wisconsin’s future workforce and community, helping ensure that all students have the opportunity to thrive and succeed. Maya Morvis is a sophomore studying Journalism and Political Science. Do you agree that State Superintendent Jill Underly’s budget proposal is good for Wisconsin schools? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of NIAID/Flickr The mpox virus (orange) in an infected cell (green) taken at the NIAID Integrative Research Facility in Fort Detrick, Maryland. SCIENCE WHO declares mpox international public health emergency, Wisconsin remains low in risk A new and contagious strain of mpox has made its way out of Central Africa, but the CDC considers the risk of the strain to be low in the United States for now. By Sonia Bendre and Lindsay Pfeiffer September 5, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The World Health Organization Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus declared mpox a public health emergency of international concern on Aug. 14 following the uptick in cases in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the spread of the virus across surrounding African countries. On Aug. 15, the public health agency of Sweden confirmed that strain Clade Ib of mpox reached outside of Africa to Sweden, where a traveler picked up the virus after visiting one of the countries affected by mpox. Since then, cases have been reported in Thailand and the Philippines, according to the New York Times. At the moment, the risk to Wisconsin and the general U.S. public is very low, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. What is mpox? Mpox, previously called monkeypox, is a virus similar to smallpox, though less severe and less contagious. There are two different strains of the virus, and the current strain is mostly caused by Clade Ib, a mutant of Clade I, according to the WHO. Typically endemic to central Africa, Clade Ib is more severe and more deadly than the genetically distinct strain that caused an outbreak in 2022, Clade II. “Whether the mortality or death rate would be similar in DRC versus somewhere else like the U.S. is unknown. But, obviously, we have to be hesitant upfront and watch very closely because it does have this increased mortality compared to the other version,” Dan Shirley, an infectious disease physician and medical director for infection prevention at UW Health, told The Daily Cardinal. Were the virus to spread, the mortality rate is expected to be lower in the U.S. than in the DRC. Unlike in the DRC, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has already approved use of two vaccines against mpox. The fatality rate for Clade Ib is around 10% in children and five percent in adults, compared to a fatality rate of one percent or lower in both populations for Clade II. The virus is also more deadly for those with comorbidities such as HIV. The virus is zoonotic — transmittable from animals to humans — and was discovered in 1958 in a monkey, though monkeys are not the infection source. It was first discovered in humans in the DRC in 1970. It belongs to the Orthopox family, along with 12 other DNA viruses. The family includes smallpox. “[Orthopox] is a group of viruses that all cause a pox disease, pustules that are on your skin,” Emma Mohr, an assistant professor in the Department of Pediatrics, told the Cardinal. Mohr’s research focuses on the transmission of Clade IIb mpox from mother to fetus during pregnancy. Mpox can also be spread person-to-person via physical contact, and Clade Ib can be transmitted sexually and through contaminated objects, as well as to a fetus through an infected mother. Those affected can experience a variety of symptoms, including swollen lymph nodes, fever and, most notably, skin lesions, which generally take weeks to heal. “The skin lesions can be all over your body, including in your mouth and down by your bottom, and can impact your ability to swallow liquids, keep liquids down and stay hydrated. Sometimes the infection is so severe that it infects the lungs and infects the brain, and that's why people die,” said Mohr. This outbreak comes on the heels of a 2022 outbreak of the Clade II strain of the virus, which affected 95,000 people across 115 countries, and over 32,000 in the U.S. alone, including 97 in Wisconsin, according to the CDC. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Both Mohr and Shirley agreed there will likely be cases of Clade Ib in the U.S. Whereas the previous outbreak affected primarily sexually active gay and bisexual men, the new outbreak primarily affects children. Around 70% of the now over 20,000 cases in DRC are in children under 15, and case numbers are likely underreported due to limitations in contact tracing, testing and surveillance, according to the WHO. More than 95% of all cases of the new strain originate from DRC, although the virus has affected 13 countries in total, according to the New York Times. So far, 975 deaths have been reported in DRC alone. Besides vaccines, social distancing can slow the disease’s spread. But some places in DRC, particularly displacement camps, are so crowded that they make distancing difficult or impossible. “I hope that the global community is able to help intervene now that the WHO has called it a public health emergency of international concern and really help to get medical care and vaccines to these impacted populations in the civil unrest in that area,” said Mohr. Recently, the WHO Director-General initiated the process for Emergency Use Listing of mpox vaccines. This listing allows companies to submit vaccines for approval and distribution by partners such as Gavi and UNICEF. Although the Emergency Use Listing of the vaccine has been initiated, it has not yet been approved, and the WHO has not officially approved the two available vaccines for use. This complicates the process for vaccines to be transported into DRC — it is estimated that around 10 million vaccines will be needed to quell the virus. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Courtesy University Health Services News Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Today in my conservative WILL law course, I was told to do course evaluations. But, through a turn of bad clicks, my mouse landed on “SexWise Module.” By Peter Pricket December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Dear Diary, Today in my conservative WILL law course, I was told to do course evaluations. But, through a turn of bad clicks, my mouse landed on “SexWise Module.” I personally already completed my SexWise Module as a freshman, but my buddy next to me, Rom Romney, overlooked the page as it opened. His jaw dropped in shock as a glossary of sex terms appeared on the page. But in a mere accident, Romney clicked a link to a feminist ethical porn award site when he was examining the module for himself. Romney went too far. He soon saw people participating in fornication and intercourse. Romney was scared because he saw his old UW-La Crosse Chancellor Joe Gow and his wife Carmen on his screen on the porn website!! I myself was left in utter disarray! Why is Mr. Gow doing that! Why is this linked to the SexWise Module! “Oh!” Romney left out a huff and a sigh. He didn’t know what pleasure was until just now. Romney came from a nice God-fearing Catholic family in upper Michigan. He’s a sin of a baby and wasn’t supposed to be born but his nun mother is a sinner. His mother wanted to protect Romney from how babies are made so he wouldn’t repeat the mistakes she made. “Romney… I didn’t want you to find out this way. You are one of my best friends! I was gonna tell you about sex after you got married,” I muttered to him. SHAME on Jennifer Mknookin for exposing this innocent Christian child to the university’s woke DEI agenda!! HE WASN’T SUPPOSED TO KNOW. What’s next, he publicly indulges. Romney did not let out anything further. SexWise is nothing but a communist Marxist experiment of a module that hurts students by forcing them to be aware of sex. I will fix this in ASM. Vote for me and check out my latest to see my campaign platform. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS New York is for the rats
Photo by Courtesy of Google Maps | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison approves police oversight, older adult services amendments during budget meeting The Council voted to include amendments related to police oversight and other services for Madison residents. By Joseph Panzer November 13, 2024 | 5:31pm CST The Madison Common Council approved Amendments Five and Four of the 2025 operating budget relating to police oversight and older adult services respectively and an additional traffic engineering amendment Tuesday during the first of multiple budget deliberation meetings. The 2025 Executive Operating Budget, introduced by Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway in October and adopted unanimously by the Common Council Tuesday, is partially funded by a $22 million property tax referendum approved by Madison residents on Nov. 5. The final budget must be approved by the council by Nov 14. The council passed 15-5 an amendment restoring $127,210 in funding to the Office of the Independent Monitor (OIM) for employee salaries and legal services. Accountability for firing members of the Madison Police Department who engage in misconduct is through a state appointed board, which led the city to create theOIM in 2020 to give more power to local citizens. Despite having been around for years, the OIM only started accepting complaints last month. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal he is “okay” with continued funding to the OIM despite “valid concerns” about its effectiveness. “That being said, I believe the council should take measures to ensure that the OIM is held accountable to specific goals set by the council,” Govindarajan said. The Common Council also approved by a narrow 11-9 vote a reallocation of $103,870 from the Community Development Division to purchased services for the Older Adult Services Request for Proposal (RFP). The Older Adult Services RFP handles case management and outreach and referral programs for seniors in the Madison area. During the meeting, District 17 Ald. Sabrina V. Madison had concerns on the amendment’s impact on seniors from marginalized communities. Most of the services seniors receive in Madison are through nonprofits that have to apply for funding from money that the city sets aside for them, which this amendment seeks to change due to perceived bias, Govindarajan said. “The city is now debating on deprioritizing what we want to fund,” Govindarajan said. “We’ve historically funded lots of senior services that have benefited older seniors who tend to be more established and resourced, but we haven’t funded nonprofits that help BIPOC/queer seniors.” Black residents in Madison’s South Side have previously told the Cap Times they have not received senior support services from nonprofits like NewBridge in the past as organizations tighten who gets access to resources and programs around the city. Alders also unanimously adopted a $6.3 million amendment to the capital budget for Traffic Engineering during the meeting. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The amendment would allow for Traffic Engineering to accept federal funds for safety improvements, including real-time communication between first responders and transportation authorities, prioritization of traffic lights for emergency vehicles and allowing the city to increase data collection on traffic incidents to reevaluate how it responds to high-risk situations, Govindarajan told the Cardinal. “[This amendment] helps us improve our roads and keep our residents safe,” Govindarajan said. “Allowing emergency vehicles to get through faster on our main roads (including Park Street) will be a major improvement.” Common Council budget deliberations are scheduled to continue through Nov. 14. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Madison Police Chief Shon Barnes gives updates on the downtown Madison mass shooting on June 9, 2024. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School The shooter has been stopped by law enforcement, and neighboring schools in Madison have been put on “secure hold,” according to the Madison Police Department. By Gavin Escott December 16, 2024 | 12:43pm CST A juvenile shot and killed two people and injured at least seven others at Abundant Life Christian School Monday morning. Madison Police Department (MPD) said they found the shooter, a student who attended the school, dead inside. MPD Chief Shon Barnes said in a press conference at noon officers responded at 10:57 a.m. to a report of an active shooter. The police found the suspected shooter dead when they entered the building. Officers did not fire their weapons. MPD previously said at least five people were killed, but they said around 1:15 p.m. Monday they had made an error. At least seven people have been taken to hospitals, and the seven injured victims sustained injuries ranging from life threatening to minor, Barnes said at the press conference. He said this remains an “active and ongoing investigation.” Abundant Life Christian School has around 390 students, according to their website. As of 1 p.m., there is heavy police presence, and roads around the school have been closed off. La Follette High School, Sennett Middle School and Elvehjem Elementary School were put on “secure hold” after news of the shooting broke, a Madison Metropolitan School District spokesperson told The New York Post. The SSM Health Clinic is the reunification site for students and parents, according to an email sent by Dane County Executive Mellissa Agard. The University of Wisconsin-Madison said there was no ongoing threat to the community in a statement at 1 p.m. and offered resources and support to students and faculty affected by the shooting. President Joe Biden has been briefed on the shooting, and senior White House officials are in touch with Madison counterparts to provide support, the White House told press Monday afternoon. Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers said in a statement on X he was “closely monitoring” the situation, and other Wisconsin politicians, including U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan and Dane County Executive Melissa Agard offered condolences and appreciation for first responders. “Stop asking why schools don’t have bullet proof glass and metal detectors at all the doors,” Barnes said. “Ask why schools have to. That's the question that needs to be asked.” Editor's note: this article was updated at 1:17 p.m. on Monday, Dec. 16, 2024 to confirm and update the number of victims reported dead by MPD. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email This is a developing story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gavin EscottGavin Escott is the campus news editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, breaking news and written in-depth on Wisconsin politics and higher education. He is the former producer of the Cardinal Call podcast. Follow him on X at @gav_escott. More This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal
The honest poet couldn’t have come at a better time, arriving with her feminist agenda just a day after Christine Blasey Ford and Brett Kavanaugh’s testimonies Photo by Image courtesy of FLARE | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Rupi Kaur empowers women when America needs it most By Sammy Gibbons September 30, 2018 | 8:25pm CDT Seeing Rupi Kaur Saturday was like going to therapy or yoga. Her honey-sweet voice lulled the audience into a meditation on self love, feminism and heartbreak, leaving us feeling empowered. The poet, known for her best-selling books “milk and honey” and “the sun and her flowers,” put on a show as soft and gentle as her poems. She stood encircled by delicate pink petals with a screen behind featuring shadows of flowers blowing in a quiet breeze. The backdrop shifted between photos of young Kaur and her family and simple line drawings mimicking sketches found in her books, giving us a visual into what was on her mind when she wrote her poems. We got a deeper look behind the scenes of Kaur’s brain during her quips between poems. She told quick stories explaining the texts or simply just speaking her mind, joking about being stuck in bed for months after a breakup or reminiscing about her family’s immigration to Canada from Punjab, India. Kaur maintained an engaging rhythm throughout her nearly two hour performance, despite not leaving the petal circle, like it was an invisible bubble protecting her. She swayed and gestured her arms in sync with each syllable, sinking into her words. She weaved several spoken word pieces accompanied by modest music, small beats that seemed to follow her lead rather than the other way around. Most of her asides and poems focused on the aftermath of or cure for breakups, or tellings of intimate experiences with a lover. She also talked about her strong bond with her mother and the strength of being a woman. The show went on for about 30 minutes too long, but every minute felt genuine. Kaur held nothing back, even laughing as she said “I’ve been too honest with you, don’t think I’m weird.” It felt like I was sitting down for a private chat with her, even though the Wisconsin Union Theater was nearly full. One lucky audience member did get to do that, as she invited someone on stage to read with her, offering her guest encouraging squeezes along the way. The honest poet couldn’t have come at a better time, arriving with her feminist agenda just a day after Christine Blasey Ford and Brett Kavanaugh’s testimonies. Each poem and thought she shared about womanhood and women’s bodies was met with the loudest audience response, a roar of solidarity. One line stuck with me, and it seems to drive Dr. Ford, strong women and people of all genders to keep fighting: “I have survived far too much to go quietly.” Sammy Gibbons is Editor-in-Chief of the Daily Cardinal. To read more of her work, click here. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Courtesy of Michael Cheng via Flickr CITY NEWS Madison Sourdough employees petition to unionize after owner declined to voluntarily recognize union Approximately 40 of the employees at the bakery will be able to vote on whether to form a union. By Francesca Pica March 3, 2023 | 4:30pm CST Employees at Madison Sourdough filed a petition to unionize with the National Labor Relations Board Monday. On behalf of the employees, representatives for the United Food and Commercial Workers Union (UFCW Local 1473) requested that the bakery, located on Madison’s east side, recognize the union. However, ownership declined. A Madison Sourdough employee, who requested anonymity out of fear of retaliation, told The Daily Cardinal that Madison Sourdough owner Andrew Hutchison refused to voluntarily recognize the union. “He’s acknowledged that the majority of workers want to join UFCW Local 1473, and he stated that he doesn’t want our relationship between him and between the employees to become adversarial,” the employee said. “But, despite that, he’s refused to voluntarily recognize our clear desire to unionize.” Andrew Hutchison told the Cap Times he believes a union would interfere with the relationship between him and his employees. “A union introduces uncertainty,” Hutchison said. “I have to work through an organization … [and] I didn’t have a choice in the matter. I inherently don’t trust that.” The employee said the owner also sent a company-wide correspondence that said a third-party union “will alter the worker-employee relationship.” “The union is not some scary, nebulous third party coming in to change things,” they said. “It’s us, it’s the supermajority of us, and we’re ready to take a seat at the bargaining table and negotiate for a fair contract.” Hutchison requested that a secret ballot election be conducted by the NLRB to determine whether staff members will unionize. Approximately 40 employees will have the ability to vote on whether to form a union, according to union representative Justin Benzschawel. This excludes owners Andrew and Emma Hutchison, as well as Molly Maciejewski, executive chef and kitchen and café executive director of operations, and Carly Rossmeissl, bread, pastry and delivery operations director. Madison Sourdough Creative Director Emily Hutchison said the decision to hold an election would ensure all employees will have the ability to decide whether to unionize. “We want to make sure that all voices are heard, so we have requested an election,” Hutchison said. “This decision will impact all of our employees, so we want to make sure it is decided by all of our employees.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Hutchison said supervisors will be willing to negotiate with the union if it is approved by the workers. “If a majority of our staff chooses to be represented by a union, we will absolutely negotiate in good faith with that union,” Hutchison said. The Madison Sourdough employee said the terms staff members are bargaining for are reasonable given the demands of the workplace. “I do feel like bakery work is pretty romanticized, but it’s really long hours, really early hours and it’s a really physically demanding workplace,” they said. “I feel like the things that everybody wants to bargain for would be reasonable in any workplace.” Ultimately, the union would help workers negotiate on more equal terms, the employee said. “As one of my coworkers put it, the relationship between the workers and the boss is an inherently imbalanced relationship,” said the employee. “We just want to even that out when we get a seat at the bargaining table.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Francesca PicaFrancesca Pica is the editor-in-chief for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the city news editor. She has covered multiple municipal elections, state politics and is a leading reporter on Madison labor issues. She served as an intern for The Capital Times, currently serves as a WisPolitics intern and will also intern with the Wisconsin State Journal this summer. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
The Aurora Borealis photographed on the night of October 9 from The Lakeshore Preservation path. Photo by Humza Pasha | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Northern lights illuminate Madison sky UW-Madison caught a rare viewing of the aurora borealis on Oct. 9 and 10. By Eiman Mir October 15, 2024 | 7:25pm CDT Madison witnessed a sightseeing northern light show on Oct. 9 and 10. The northern lights, or aurora borealis, are typically only visible near the polar regions. However, extreme solar activity can extend the viewing range south. While it is typical for only northern Wisconsin to see the lights, this year, the Madison area received a glimpse of the show as well. This year brings more solar activity since this year marks a time of peak activity in the sun’s 11-year cycle, bringing increases in electromagnetic activity. This can lead to solar flares, which NASA defines as an “intense burst of radiation coming from the release of magnetic energy associated with sunspots.” An increase in sunspots can lead to more coronal mass ejections, which are large eruptions of magnetized solar plasma. When directed toward the Earth's surface, the interaction between these energized particles and atmospheric gasses leads to the aurora borealis. Different gasses produce different colors. Last week, the northern lights were best seen on Thursday and Friday. Crowds gathered around Memorial Union, Observatory Hill and other spots on campus to capture photos of the view. Seeing the northern lights is difficult with the naked eye, but cameras are able to better capture the colors. Photos with a longer exposure time will be able to pick up the colors best. Opportunities to view aurora borealis are expected to come up throughout the 2024-25 winter season. The Space Weather Prediction Center updates their aurora borealis viewing prediction tool daily. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Cameron Schneider | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Hovde concedes to Baldwin in U.S. Senate race Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde conceded to incumbent Sen. Tammy Baldwin nearly two weeks after the Nov. 5 election. By Anna Kleiber November 18, 2024 | 2:23pm CST Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde conceded in his race against Sen. Tammy Baldwin Monday nearly two weeks after the Nov. 5 election. "As a result, and my desire not to add to political strife through a contentious recount, I have decided to concede the election," Hovde said in a video released Monday. Hovde said he didn’t regret running for the U.S. Senate, but said he would take a “much-needed break” and return to his businesses and look for “other ways to make an impact” through philanthropic work. The concession comes after Hovde released a video on Nov. 12 in which he questioned “irregularities” in the results. While Associated Press called the race for Baldwin on Nov. 6, Hovde claimed that certain precincts in Milwaukee had over 200% voter turnout, which the Wisconsin Elections Commission later refuted in a statement released Thursday. Hovde held a narrow lead over Baldwin before Milwaukee — which counts its ballots at one central location — reported its ballots. Baldwin took the lead after those results came in around 4 a.m. Nov. 6. The Milwaukee Election Commission had to recount about 34,000 ballots on Election Day after the doors of tabulator machines were not locked and sealed. Both parties agreed nothing wrong was done, according to Wisconsin Elections Commission Chair Ann Jacobs. Milwaukee is a historically heavily Democratic city, with Baldwin winning 71.5% of the vote against Wisconsin State Sen. Leah Vukmir in Milwaukee County in 2018. Hovde, who lost by about 29,000 votes, received about 54,000 fewer votes than President-elect Donald Trump. Baldwin received about 5,000 more votes than Vice President Kamala Harris. In Wisconsin, candidates can only ask for a recount if they trail by one percentage point or less. In the official tally, Hovde currently trails Baldwin by 0.9%. Wisconsin precincts have until Tuesday to certify their results, and Hovde has until Thursday to request a recount. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
The University of Wisconsin-Madison's Bascom Hall photographed Nov. 6. Banners designed by UW-Madison doctoral student Molli Pauliot and faculty members Marianne Fairbanks and Stephen Hilyard are meant to represent commitment to "respecting the inherent sovereignty of the Ho-Chunk Nation and the other Native Nations of Wisconsin." Photo by Liam Beran | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective By Hallie Albert December 5, 2024 | 12:00am CST Flashback to September 2022, my freshman year of college, when I planned to obtain a biology degree, go to medical school and become a doctor. I was fixed on this path, thinking I was a failure if I did anything else. As my freshman year began, I disliked my courses more than I could ever imagine. I forced myself to enjoy the work, and I wouldn’t admit to myself that I didn’t like it. I put intense amounts of pressure on myself and worked extremely hard. Despite my efforts, I continued to struggle not only academically, but socially and emotionally as well. I finally made the decision to switch my major because I knew I had to, not because I wanted to. I couldn't help the feelings of disappointment and confusion. I started writing about these experiences, feelings and whatever else I wanted. I was constantly writing, trying to figure out my interests and passions while navigating through new major choices. During this time, I continuously felt like I was the only one struggling. It genuinely seemed that everyone around me had their whole life perfectly planned out. Let me tell you — that was far from true. This fueled my motivation to begin writing for The Daily Cardinal. I wanted to create articles and use my voice to share experiences and knowledge while reiterating that it is okay to struggle and sometimes even fail. I went on to write many articles focusing on these themes, including the pressures facing students and switching majors during college, both sharing and reflecting on personal experiences. Now, I thrive in my courses, enjoy what I am learning and, most importantly, I am happy with my achievements. That being said, I would not be where I am today without my struggles. I was constantly asking myself, “why is this happening to me?” and now I know. Your hardships, struggles and failures may feel detrimental in the moment, but in the grand scheme of things, they are crucial to your success. These are the moments that help to make you stronger, resilient and overall the best version of yourself. If it wasn’t for my rocky freshman year, failed relationships, academic confusion and various other challenges, I wouldn't be the person I am today. It was through these hardships that I learned the most about myself, becoming wiser on the other side. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year Post-election slump: Finding motivation in a time of uncertainty
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball claims series against Hoosiers in Bloomington Wisconsin Badgers softball went two for three against the Hoosiers to improve on their overall record. By Abby Shulman April 30, 2024 | 11:43am CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Indiana Hoosiers in a three-game series April 26-28. After coming up short in the first game, they made a comeback to steal the series win. Opening with a close loss Wisconsin was up 5-0 until the middle of the fifth inning on Friday when the Hoosiers retaliated to come away with the 6-5 victory. First baseman Fiona Girardot cranked a leadoff homer in the first, followed by catcher Emmy Wells’ lead-extending solo home run in the fourth. The Badgers then broke through with a three-run rally in the fifth. Relief pitcher Hilary Blomberg’s double drove in shortstop Ava Kuszak before Wells’ power show continued. Her second home run of the game — a two-run blast into deep left — made the score 5-0 by the middle of the fifth. The Hoosiers crashed the party in the bottom of the fifth for a heartbreaking comeback that started with a series of singles, cashing in two runs. By the end of the sixth, the Hoosiers were only down by one run after Wisconsin starting pitcher Gabi Salo’s pitch was drilled into left for a two-run homer. The Hoosiers tied the game then stole the win in the seventh. Evening up the series The Badgers started off with the lead again in game two Saturday and made sure to finish what they started, walking away with an 8-6 victory. Wisconsin right fielder Brooke Kuffel led the way with an RBI in the first, bringing left fielder Kate Linkletter home for the early 1-0 lead. The Hoosiers got on the board earlier in game two, tying the Badgers in the second when the runner on third stole home. Following a scoreless third inning, Wisconsin’s five-run fourth inning drove the Badgers to a victory. A series of RBIs and errors led outfielder Alivia Bark, third baseman Skylar Sirdashney and outfielder Eden Echevarria home. The streak continued with Blomberg hammering the ball out of left-center for a two-run homer that made it 7-1. By the end of the inning, the Hoosiers cut their deficit to 7-2 with a run. The Badgers’ offense quickly bounced back in the sixth with two more insurance runs — Wells and outfielder Molly Schlosser crossed home plate thanks to Kuffel’s RBI double. In the bottom frame, Badger starting pitcher Shelby Jacobson allowed four runs before Blomberg took the mound to end it an 8-6 game. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Securing the series victory Wisconsin dominated in the series closer with a 7-1 sweep on Sunday. With an RBI double from Blomberg and Wells’ third home run of the series — another two-run homer smoked to deep left — the Badgers were up 3-0 by the end of the first inning. The Hoosiers got in their one and only run of the game off Wisconsin’s pitcher Jacobson during the third, scoring on a fielder’s choice. In the fourth, Kuszak took the plate with two walked Badgers on bases — Sirdashney and Hubbard — when she tanked the pitch over the left field wall for a three-run drill. Finally, second baseman Ellie Hubbard’s double in the fifth drove Kuffel home for the game’s closing run. With a total of 24 hits and 20 runs across the series, Wisconsin improved their season record to .413 (19-27). They close their Big 10 season with a series against the Maryland Terrapins May 3-5 back home in Madison. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo courtesy of Perennial Order via IGDB. ARTS Perennial Order is what you see when you stop and smell the flowers A challenging boss rush meets a strikingly grotesque presentation in Gardenfiend Games’ debut title. By Arin Chandra November 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Perennial Order is Gardenfiend Games’ first venture into game development, mixing a uniquely haunting visual and audio combo with ingenious gameplay decisions to form a marvelous world of plants, beasts and monsters to conquer. Released on Sept. 6 and published by SOEDESCO, Perennial Order creates a challenging experience that takes full advantage of its flawless presentation to envelop the player in the wonders (and horrors) of nature. Natural beauty The game opens with the resurrection of the player character, known only as the Perennial Knight. Immediately, they are tasked with wandering through a bleak and decaying forest, slaying a formidable tree-like creature at the end. This eventful opening segment foreshadows the game’s strongest aspects: its presentation and world building. Throughout the journey, the mood always remains consistently bleak, only matched by the sparse tones of hopefulness in the game’s hub areas, which are populated by non-player characters that both give insight to the state of the world as well as help the knight out with upgrades. The arboreal-infused art style is what makes the presentation top notch. Areas are uniquely characterized through hand-drawn environments and NPCs, ultimately making every place the knight visits a distinct treat for the eyes. From lush jungles filled with life to the foreboding enigma of the abyss, Gardenfiend Games has created a world whose areas feel like walking into paintings. Its art style also contributes to the suspense and horror elements of the experience, especially to the designs of the NPCs and bosses. Everything the player sees in the game is marked with a sense of dread to contribute to the ominous atmosphere, as well as a sense of wonder for the world that came before the events of the game. The art style is not the only star of the show. The original soundtrack captures the desperation behind each hostile encounter as well as the slight flickers of hope that linger in the game’s plant-diseased world. Complementing the foreboding mood Perennial Order maintains, it evokes strong emotions with every new track. A solid narrative helps to give purpose to the masterful presentation of the game. Every boss has some type of story behind them which the knight can discover as they explore and overcome their respective areas. While some explanation for the state of the world is certainly given, there could have been more in terms of what happens to the knight directly to give more weight to the player’s actions and create a more satisfying ending. Aside from the slight misstep in the story, Perennial Order proves to be an exceptionally well-presented experience that keeps the player in a sense of shock throughout its events thanks to its amazing artistic decisions. Thorns in sides Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If Perennial Order is like a painting, then its gameplay is a challenging mix of creating an effective playstyle with the tools at hand and avoiding as many mistakes as possible. It takes only one hit for the knight to fall. However, the game gives them the tools they need to succeed. These include powerful basic charged attacks and holding Wisps, which allows them to either dash to safety or perform various special attacks called Instincts. This allows for the knight to choose between non-stop aggression and precise critical hits. Speaking of precision, Perennial Order demands it from the player at all costs. Each dash is marked with the risk of not being offensive enough to shorten the lengthy boss encounters, and every use of Instincts can prove a fatal error that costs the player time. The delicate balancing act of offense and defense with the limiting Wisp system contributes to the tension and strategy involved with the combat. The game’s difficulty is further pushed forward by the boss battles, which are the main attractions of its combat system. They are incredibly designed within the bounds of the art style and a worthy challenge of the knight’s skills and Instinct combinations. Most importantly, they are fun encounters that encourage various different strategies and setups to overcome. Even though one strategy can work for every boss, there are still many tactics to try out. There is even a boss rush mode that allows players to refight them as many times as they please, encouraging them to push their limits and master every aspect of the combat system. All of this results in a tightly implemented combat system that is pushed to its absolute limit with difficult, creative and fun encounters that encourage players to learn and adapt. Final thoughts Perennial Order proves to be a good omen for Gardenfiend Games and their future in the industry, successfully combining a solid game direction with incredible audio and visual components. The art style is an enthralling take on nature’s unbridled wrath and shows what the developers are capable of. They also manage to make the boss rush aspect an amazing experience, with each fight being a significant development in the player’s story. Even though its narrative leaves something to be desired, Perennial Order is certainly a game worth picking out for the bouquet. Overall rating: 9/10 - Amazing Length: 8-10 hours Perennial Order is out now on Steam, PS5 and XBox Series X. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Shake Shack will open its second Wisconsin location at the Hilldale Shopping Center in 2020. Photo by Courtesy of Aaronr12300 through Creative Commons | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Hilldale welcomes four new businesses opening in old AMC theater Four new businesses are set to open in late 2024 and 2025, replacing the old AMC Theatre 6 at Hilldale Shopping Center. By Marin Rosen November 20, 2024 | 2:00am CST Hilldale Shopping Center will welcome the first of four new businesses to open in the old AMC Theatre space this weekend, Hilldale announced in October. AMC Theatre 6 closed in December 2022, allowing for new businesses to take over the space. That month, the Madison Common Council unanimously approved a proposal to redevelop Hilldale that included repurposing the 40,000-square-foot theater into a two-story retail center. Nearly two years later, retailers Warby Parker, Sephora, Sweetgreen and Jaxen Grey will fill the repurposed space at Hilldale Shopping Center in the coming months. Optometrist Warby Parker is the first of the four businesses to open, with its grand opening set for Nov. 23. They are relocating from their previous spot on 401 State St. Following the city’s approval of the renovation in December 2022, Hilldale general manager Nanci Horn told the Cap Times the shopping center is “thrilled that the Madison Common Council has moved forward with an approval of our expansion plan for Hilldale.” “The property has been a beloved community destination for over 60 years, and our goal has always been to continually enhance its offerings, inclusive of a diverse merchandise mix, restaurant uses and an array of community-focused events,” Horn said. At the grand opening, Warby Parker is giving out a free custom tote bag with any eyewear purchase while supplies last and 15% when shoppers buy two or more pairs of prescription eyeglasses or sunglasses. Jaxen Grey, a Minneapolis based men’s retail store, is set to open in February 2025. The Hilldale location will be the first to open in Wisconsin. Jaxen Grey manager Oliver Swingen told WMTV on Tuesday the city of Madison’s “dynamic range of people” makes it a nice fit for the store. “With the variety of clothes we carry, there is something for everyone, so I think Madison will enjoy having us here, and we will enjoy being here as well,” Swingen said. Sephora and Sweetgreen locations are set to open in 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison passes property tax referendum On election night, the City of Madison voted to accept a referendum that will raise the property tax levy. By Joseph Panzer November 5, 2024 | 11:43pm CST The city of Madison’s $22 million funding referendum passed Tuesday night. The referendum will raise property taxes above their state limit to close a $22 million deficit for 2025. The deficit would have caused Madison to encounter difficulties with paying the salaries of city employees and continuing providing services to residents. State law prevents cities from raising income taxes or local sales tax to counter shortfalls. The 2023-25 biennial budget passed by the Republican-controlled Legislature contained no increases in funding for shared revenue in Wisconsin, leaving Dane County cities underfunded compared to the rest of the state. Officials in the city government have previously told The Daily Cardinal the blame for this deficit lies with the Legislature and the shift to fiscal conservatism that began under Gov. Scott Walker’s administration in 2010. Wisconsin cities have been unable to increase their tax levies in response to inflation by more than one percent of the city’s total taxable property value since May 2011. "I am particularly grateful that we do not have to consider cuts to essential services that students rely on, such as late-night and weekend busses and public safety," District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told the Cardinal. "These are services that students rely on daily, and I will not let the city compromise on them." Madison is one of the fastest growing cities in the state, according to the Wisconsin Department of Administration, creating concern that an inability to secure funds will result in hiring problems in the city. Though the city has faced a budget deficit for 14 years, the 2025 budget gap would have been the largest seen in years, Madison Finance Director David Schmiedlicke previously told the Cardinal. The average Madison homeowner will pay around $240 more in property taxes annually as a result of this referendum’s passage. Addressing a crowd of reporters at City Hall, Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway gave closing remarks on concerns from residents about the tax hike. “It’s not easy to vote to raise your own taxes, and we should never have been put in this position by the state Legislature,” Rhodes-Conway said. “It’s my commitment to the community that we as the city of Madison — and hopefully in coalition with other cities around the state and other folks who care about cities — will work with the state Legislature to get the investment that we need from the state of Wisconsin into cities.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH Trump drew marginalized voters on the economy, immigration, despite Project 2025 and authoritarianism ties Latinos and women helped drive President-elect Donald Trump’s win despite policy targeting them. These voters told The Daily Cardinal why they opted to choose Trump. By Avery Chheda December 1, 2024 | 2:00am CST President-elect Donald Trump surprised observers by not only winning the electoral college in this year’s presidential election, but also the popular vote — becoming only the second Republican candidate to do so this century. White men, particularly within the working class, made up a massive portion of the Republican vote on Nov. 5, and white women increasingly contributed to help drive Trump’s win. Trump increased his base of support among Latino men, gaining 7% more Latino votes than 2020, when he won 35% of their vote. Trump also prioritized and won the support of young men ages 18-49, gaining over 50% of their votes. Trump’s interview with podcaster Joe Rogan — whose audience is 81% male — just before the election amassed nearly 40 million views in just three days, reaching millions of male voters across the country. In the recent election cycle, traditionally liberal and left leaning demographics shifted red. Trump supporters who are women and part of marginalized groups, impacted by issues including abortion, LGBTQ+ rights and immigration, told The Daily Cardinal how their values aligned with the president-elect. Supports undeterred by claims of authoritarianism, see Project 2025 as false attack Following Trump’s electoral victory, many individuals have labeled Trump an authoritarian. “I would say that there’s some truth to that,” said Doreen, a Wisconsin-based Amazon influencer who voted for Trump. “Being a billionaire business owner, I think [authoritarianism] is a trait in a lot of leadership positions.” Christopher Slinker, a Republican activist and real estate agent, does not consider Trump authoritarian, noting his lack of ability to do what he wants whenever he wants. “He is going to be checked and have balances more so than the normal president because of how visceral the Democrats are about him personally,” Slinker said. Project 2025 is a multi-step project written by over 100 Republicans detailing a four pillar plan to reshape the federal government. President-elect Trump denies any connection to the project, calling certain proposals “absolutely ridiculous and abysmal.” Key contributors to the project remain close confidants of Trump, including Trump’s nominee for the White House Office of Management and Budget Russell Vought and Brendan Carr, who will lead the Federal Communications Commission. Recently, Trump has tapped nearly six Project 2025 authors to his administration as well. But Doreen is not worried about Trump’s cabinet picks despite some of their ties to Project 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I don’t think that we can stay away from some of the people that he picked…[Trump's] priority when he’s choosing [cabinet members] is really loyalty,” Doreen said. Slinker is not concerned by Project 2025, calling it an “excuse” for Democrats to attack Republican candidates. “I have not heard any Republican, including the Trump campaign, including any of our Senate campaigns or Assembly campaigns, even talk about Project 2025, so I think it’s a false attack,” said Slinker. Supporters see Trump as the most qualified candidate In an interview with Rogan ahead of the election, Vice President-elect JD Vance said the campaign would win the “normal gay guy vote.” Slinker, who is gay, said he was unaware of Vance’s comments. While Slinker said he is empathetic towards transgender people and thinks life should be easier for transgender youth, he told the Cardinal “a boy is a boy, a girl is a girl.” “What I don’t support is the government forcing that upon others,” said Slinker. Magaly, a University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman who comes from a family of Latinos who support Trump, thought Trump ran a stronger campaign than Harris because ”he didn’t have all of these celebrities dancing, making the country look like a joke.” Trump rallies included performances from musicians and comedians alike. Magaly said Harris could have won her vote if she hadn’t “pretended to be Black when she’s not,” adding that “she’s Indian." Harris was born to an Indian mother and Jamaican father and has long identified as both Black and South Asian American. Doreen said Harris’ downfall came from her failure to separate herself from President Joe Biden, and the policies she did differentiate from Biden, “she doesn’t even have the authority to grant.” Doreen, a devout Catholic, considers herself a woman of “traditional values.” “I am not somebody that necessarily believes that a woman should be a President of the United States,” Doreen said. “Now there are some exceptions to that, [like] Margaret Thatcher. They called her the Iron Lady for a reason.” Doreen, who believes women “wear their heart on their sleeves,” said they are unfit to run the country because it’s not a “part of their DNA.” On the campaign trail, Doreen said Trump should’ve “regurgitated” the message of his last term rather than “blowing his mouth off and sounding like an idiot.” “Morally, he’s a sinner,” Doreen said. “[But I’m] not electing the man, [I’m] electing the policies.” Doreen said she voted for Trump for a variety of reasons, including her belief he would lead to a “more prosperous” economy, noting increasing grocery prices, and being “100% pro-life.” Trump has previously said he would leave abortion up to individual states, but has declined to endorse a national abortion ban. Doreen said she has “friends who are not married, or not moms,” who share different opinions about abortion, including using phrases like “back the vag.” “For me, just because she’s a woman and has a uterus, doesn’t mean that I’m going to cast my vote for her,” Doreen said. Voters support Trump’s immigration policy Magaly, an Illinois native who voted in Wisconsin, told the Cardinal she values a secure border. “In my neighborhood, there’s these two guys dressed up, going and assaulting people,” Magaly said. Magaly didn’t know their immigration status, but said she believes “you can tell when someone is not from here.” “[You can tell whether someone is legal or illegal] when they’re in the streets, when you see them coming into stores and just looking around and stuff,” Magaly said. Voters view Trump as the right choice for the economy In Milwaukee, the GOP also targeted Black and Latino voters, opening centers on the north and south sides to engage with their communities. Gerard Randall, a Black Milwaukee resident and top Wisconsin GOP official, credited Trump’s increase in Black support to his “full-throated effort” into outreach to African American voters, especially through community outreach centers. Following this election, Randall hopes “people will pay more attention to policy, not personality.” Along with outreach to communities of color, other Wisconsin voters found appeal in Trump’s economic and social policies. “A lot of people like me voted for their wallet,” Randall said. But voters weren’t fully in on Trump’s economic policy. Slinker, who told the Cardinal Trump’s tax cuts weren’t “directed at enough people,” said he hopes Trump changes the criteria for further tax cuts under his second term. “Many hard-working Americans did not benefit from [Trump’s tax cuts],” Slinker said. Doreen also doesn’t think Trump’s policy is perfect. She said Trump is a “big spender” and is concerned with his positions on foreign policy and tariffs. “I’m hoping he gets it under control,” Doreen said. “I just don’t think you can say you’re just gonna tariff everything… It’s gonna blow up in his face if he does that.” Supporters split on heads of new Department of Government Efficiency Billionaire Elon Musk and former GOP presidential candidate Vivek Ramaswamy were named heads of Trump’s new Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE). The department aims to “dismantle Government Bureaucracy, slash excess regulations, cut wasteful expenditures and restructure Federal Agencies.” Doreen is happy Trump is addressing government spending habits, but is weary of Musk’s position as head of the new Department of Government Efficiency, seeing Musk and Trump’s tight-knit relationship as a potential conflict of interest. “With Elon Musk being so close to Trump, is it truly going to be unbiased? I’m not sure about that,” Doreen said. Slinker said Musk and Ramaswamy are “perfectly equipped” to lead DOGE. “As Republicans…we’ve always said the government needs to run more like a business,” Slinker said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Shar-Ron Buie, the associate director of JustDane, calls for government regulation to address extreme heat in Wisconsin prisons at a press conference on Nov. 20, 2024. Photo by Audrey Lopez-Stane | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS ‘The walls sweat’: Extreme heat in Wisconsin prison systems prompts calls for major regulation A press conference held by University of Wisconsin-Madison Capstone students called for significant change to fix severe heating issues in Wisconsin prisons. By Audrey Lopez-Stane November 23, 2024 | 10:25am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison students and advocates called for government regulation to address extreme heat in all corrections facilities across the state at a press conference Wednesday. UW-Madison Capstone students held the press conference to bring attention to the growing crisis of heat vulnerability in Wisconsin prisons. In Wisconsin, prison temperatures can reach as high as 97 degrees Fahrenheit in the summer. Temperatures above 80 degrees Fahrenheit can show a 20% increase in violent interactions in prison. “The walls sweat, and the paint peels,” James Morgan, lead organizer for criminal justice reform advocacy group MOSES, said at Wednesday’s press conference. He added that the conditions inside the state’s prisons “cause mental, physical and emotional harm,” and stressed that prisoners are human beings, not just “violent criminals.” Shar-Ron Buie, associate director of JustDane, a nonprofit organization that advocates for previously incarcerated people, said the unreasonably high temperatures in Wisconsin prisons “transcends mere discomfort.” Buie voiced that correct temperatures in prison are not a luxury but necessities for basic survival. The environment becomes more violent and illnesses become more prevalent under high temperatures, which correlates with higher rates of heat-related deaths. Wisconsin prisoners, however, do not get a choice in their climate. “Temperatures are controlled from a centralized location, often arbitrarily and capriciously decided on by the officer,” Buie said at Wednesday’s press conference. Even when prisoners attempt to block air vents, Buie said there is little escape from the unbearable heat. WISDOM Transformational Justice Campaign Coordinator Mark Rice touched on his own experience in the Wisconsin prison system and said “forcing people to live in extreme heat is a form of torture.” James Wilborn, a close colleague of Rice, died in the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility in 2015. While Rice and other activists said that heat exhaustion contributed to Wilborn’s death, the Wisconsin Department of Corrections (DOC) Communications Director Beth Hardtke told The Daily Cardinal in a statement Nov. 21 there were zero heat-related deaths in Wisconsin DOC facilities since 2013. The DOC declined to comment on Wilborn’s individual cause of death. Rice attributed prisoner maltreatment to aggressive rhetoric and monetary reasons. The dehumanizing narrative about prisoners results in government and taxpayer opposition for further prison funding. But this does not diminish the need for safe prison environments, he said. Although Hardtke said the DOC is planning air tempering projects for multiple Wisconsin facilities, she acknowledged that most DOC buildings are still not universally air conditioned. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
RSV F protein revealing the linkage that is the target for future research. Image was created using cryo-electron tomography. Photo courtesy of Wright Lab/UW-Madison SCIENCE New images of RSV may hold key to unlocking new treatments A research team at the University of Wisconsin-Madison produced high-resolution images of RSV structure, important for RSV treatment options and vaccine development. By Elliott Murray October 31, 2024 | 2:00am CDT A research team at the University of Wisconsin-Madison has taken a major step toward deciphering the complexity of the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) structure. Led by Elizabeth Wright, a professor of biochemistry, this team has released new high-resolution images of the virus that will aid in developing new treatment and vaccine options. Globally, RSV is the cause of nearly 3 million hospitalizations and 160,000 deaths annually, according to the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Due to the intricate structure of the virus, treatment and vaccine options are extremely limited. High-risk children can receive preventative treatment, and two vaccines have been recently approved for older adults, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics and the New England Journal of Medicine. But for most Americans, there remains no efficient way to treat or prevent this virus. The Journal of General Virology describes infectious RSV particles as filamentous and pleomorphic, meaning they possess long, thread-like structures that can be irregular in length and width. The complexity of these virus particles has limited development of preventative and treatment drugs — researchers such as Wright’s team have had difficulty determining drug targets within these highly intricate structures. Identifying these drug targets requires an understanding of what proteins regulate the structure of infectious RSV particles. As described in their recent publication in Nature, Wright’s research team produced high-resolution 3D images of the virus and the proteins that determine its structure. Utilizing a technique called cryo-electron tomography, in which infectious RSV particles are frozen at cryogenic temperatures, they were able to inspect the structure of RSV at certain moments in time. They captured 2D images of the frozen infectious viral particles at particular tilt increments. These images were then combined and averaged to computationally generate a 3D representation of the virus structure. An analysis of this 3D representation revealed that the structure of two proteins — RSV M and RSV F proteins — within RSV are particularly critical to understanding the structure of the virus. “The imaging found that the RSV M protein is regulating the structure of these filamentous particles,” Wright said. “The M protein forms a helical-like lattice, and it is this lattice of the protein coming together that is regulating RSV formation.” These RSV M proteins also correspond to the positioning of another protein: RSV F. This membrane protein aids in the fusion of the viral RSV membrane with the host cell membrane. The imaging of the protein structure revealed that RSV F proteins are arranged in pairs. Each pair is held together by a small “tag” or linkage. Wright said her team now intends to investigate the structure of this link between two RSV F proteins. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “We want to take a high-resolution image of the little link so we can engineer some sort of target to keep RSV F proteins linked,” said Wright. By keeping the linkage intact, she told the Cardinal, the virus will not be as infectious. Along with further investigation of the RSV F protein, Wright’s team intends to study other potential drug targets on the interior of the virus. “Having more high-resolution structure images will give us more pieces of the story,” Wright said. As RSV is also related to several other viruses, including measles, rabies and Ebola, according to the Journal of General Virology, her team hopes that their discoveries regarding the structure of RSV can be applied to the development of treatment and vaccines for related viruses. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
"Into the Breach" is out now for PC. Photo by Image courtesy of Daily Mars | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘Into the Breach’ is a brilliant strategy game from the makers of ‘FTL’ By Marty Forbeck April 10, 2018 | 11:39am CDT If you’d have told me a few months ago that Subset Games, the makers of “FTL: Faster Than Light,” were going to come out with one of the tightest, most interesting strategy games ever made, I’d have laughed in your face. “FTL” was an interesting roguelite, sure: It featured frustrating, tough as nails, half hour long runs that ultimately came down to a roll of the dice, but the level of mechanical and narrative variety on offer was more than enough to distract from the fact you were losing all the time. However, no matter what you were doing, the combat in “FTL” never added up to much more than two guys standing on opposite sides of a room flinging hourglasses at each other with catapults. Whoever has the bigger and fuller hourglasses is always going to win, so the victory is determined before the fight starts — it’s just a matter of whether or not you can realize you’re outmatched soon enough to get away. Comparatively, the individual chess-like strategy fights of “Into the Breach” contain some of the most brilliant strategy puzzles ever made. With only five or so turns each and a few pieces to work with, they contain none of the fluff present in games like “Fire Emblem” or “XCOM.” Never in “Into the Breach” will you simply move a piece to move it across the map. At any point in time, you’re juggling the need to attack your enemies with the need to prepare for incoming foes to defend your base structures and your own units. Every action you take has to accomplish multiple things, and those actions have to link up with one another to accomplish even more things. Better yet, every time one of your defensive structures takes a hit, your very limited health bar — which is preserved over matches — takes damage. So a screw up in one match can mean big consequences for a long portion of the game. Near-perfect matches aren’t a special occasion in this game: They are fully expected in order to beat it. "Near-perfect matches aren’t a special occasion in this game: They are fully expected in order for you to beat it." Fortunately, it’s not that hard to get those near-perfect matches. If you keep your units alive and play the game smart, there’s almost always a way to get out of any given turn without taking any damage — it’s just up to you to see to it. I lost this game in the final match twice due to errors which were entirely preventable. While “Into the Breach” has some of the best moment-to-moment strategy gameplay in existence, the tissue connecting the matches is a little flimsy. Each match takes place on a region within one of four islands. While they all center around the same tile-based grid strategy, each island has its own distinct enemies and mechanical gimmicks. Initially, it’s necessary that you visit and complete all of the island in order to unlock them, but afterward there’s little incentive to revisit areas you don’t like. Every island has its difficulty balanced to match your party the moment you step foot on it, so you can confidently visit whichever islands you want in whatever order. The final fight in the game opens up after you complete just two islands, and it, too is always balanced to your party’s level of progression. So if you’re really into the Fire Island and the Grasslands but are not a fan of the Ice or Acid Islands, you can wave them goodbye. Maybe you’ll stop by again someday for some sort of achievement or challenge run, but you never have to set up shop there. In a sense this is nice — allowing players to pick and choose which content they like best — but it assumes that players don’t want to see everything that the game has to offer. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The game’s story isn’t delivered with much confidence, either. What’s there is excellent and really gives the game a unique narrative feel, but most of the time, the story is mere background fodder for the gameplay. You play as a time traveler leading a team of giant robots into the past in order to launch a last-ditch defense against a race of bug-like alien creatures called the Vek. You return to the past just hours before the Vek overwhelm the Earth and must push them back on a couple local islands near their point of origin. The player must do this long enough to gain access to their base so you can fight your way in and blow their headquarters to smithereens. It’s a run-of-the-mill invasion narrative, which only sets itself apart in its framing. The game has something to say about endless war and conflict. Even though it has a “Victory” screen, its story never really resolves itself. Every time you lose the game, or you decide things are getting a little rough and you want to start over, the world you’re in doesn’t reset. You abandon the entire timeline you’re in to the alien invaders and simply hop over to an alternate universe where you haven’t screwed up yet. Even when you do manage to beat the game, your team just hops to yet another timeline, looking to fix that one as well. This perpetual cycle of genocide and hope for salvation — and what it might do to people over time — is by far the game’s most interesting story aspect, but it’s rarely expanded upon. Characters react to this cycle in single lines of dialogue, and there’s no feel for how their mental states are changing. If you want more developed characters, turn back to “Fire Emblem.” If you want an invasion narrative that lasts long enough for you to get really invested, “XCOM” has you covered. But if you’re looking for something fun, quick and with enough of a story to keep you engaged for a while, I recommend “Into the Breach.” Final Grade: B+ Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison reinstates, alters sex education module after link to adult film award site prompted removal The university removed the SexWise module after an October inquiry from conservative student newspaper The Madison Federalist revealed the module contained a link to an adult film award site. By Jake Piper December 3, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison reinstated a sex education module after removing the module on Oct. 16, 2024 because an inquiry from conservative student newspaper, The Madison Federalist revealed the module contained a link to an adult film award site, the Feminist Porn Awards. University Health Services offers the SexWise Canvas module as one of four violence prevention modules. UW-Madison first-years and transfers are required to complete one of the four modules before enrolling in classes and all other students are encouraged to take one GetWise module each year. UW-Madison spokesperson Kelly Tyrrell told The Daily Cardinal the university conducted their yearly review of the module ahead of schedule after Federalist Editor-in-Chief Benjamin Rothove’s inquiry and reinstated the module with “updates throughout the program in support of clarity, plain language and inclusivity.” “Research shows that comprehensive sex education can prevent people from both causing and experiencing sexual violence. SexWIse aims to provide information that meets students where they are — regardless of their sexuality, gender identity or level of knowledge,” Tyrrell said. Spencer Runde, Promoting Awareness, Victim Empowerment UW member, told the Cardinal most changes to the module were “minor” and questioned the initial removal of the module. “Even though just a small part of my experience was in that module, I still felt like I got silenced by the university,” Runde said. Rory Madden, Sex Out Loud chair, also worried about the module’s absence during the Red Zone, a period of time from September to Thanksgiving during which the majority of sexual assaults on college campuses occur. “I want to go to a school knowing the administration supports me and all my identities and overall taking [GetWise] down was really hurtful to me as a queer person and as a survivor,” Madden said. Runde and Madden were both “frustrated” by the Federalist article. “I think that his article hurt a lot of people,” Madden said. Madden supported some changes to the module, but overall she said “the cons outweigh the pros in this situation.” The changes she disagreed with included removing words from the module’s “sex glossary,” resources surrounding safe intimacy and sex, the university's land acknowledgement from all GetWIse modules, links to a “feminist, ethical porn blog” and rewording mentions of casual sex. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Madden disagreed with Rothove’s characterization of the link as a “pornographic website.” Instead, she argued the link was to “a blog that contained a link to an ethical porn site, which talked about where to find ethical porn.” When asked about their thoughts on the removal of the website, Runde declined to comment. Tyrrell said the university updated references in the module with “research-based evidence and to best align with the program’s goals.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Thriller versus Alabama concludes winning weekend for Badgers Entering with a nine-game win streak, the Badgers held their own against their toughest competition to date, finishing the weekend 3-2. By Justin Alpert March 14, 2023 | 5:32pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team (13-8) went 3-2 at the Bevo Classic in Austin, Texas this weekend. Wisconsin split its first four games, beating Texas State (17-7) twice and losing both matchups with ninth-ranked Texas (21-3-1). The weekend culminated in a thrilling comeback win over 13th-ranked Alabama (20-6). Defensive issues returned to plague the Badgers, but they played well enough otherwise to keep pace with their best competition to date in 2023. Friday: 4-2 W vs. Texas State Gabi Salo opened the weekend with a gem for Wisconsin, but with the Badgers unable to solve Bobcat starter Jessica Mullins, the game remained scoreless after eight innings. Wisconsin then scored four runs in the top of the 10th with just one hit — a Christaana Angelopulos two-run single to make it 4-0 after an error, wild pitch, walk and hit batter had gotten the Badgers on the board. Salo allowed a couple unearned runs in the bottom of the inning. With two outs and the tying run up, Maddie Schwartz entered and secured the win with a strikeout. The 124-pitch, 8.2 inning outing continued Salo’s stellar 2023 campaign and eliminated any doubt about her belonging in the starting rotation. Friday: 5-1 L vs. Texas The Longhorns outhit the Badgers 10-2, but the game was close until Texas tagged Paytn Monticelli and Schwartz for three runs in the fifth inning. Monticelli (5-1) suffered her first loss in one of her worst outings thus far, allowing four runs (three earned) on six hits in four innings. Wisconsin’s only run came in the sixth, when second baseman Rylie Crane came around to score after a double — the team’s first hit of the game. Saturday: 4-3 W vs. Texas State Monticelli allowed three runs (one earned) in a 30-pitch, 1.2-inning start. Luckily, the Badgers started hot with four first-inning runs on four singles and a hit-by-pitch. Wisconsin’s bullpen, with 2.1 innings from Tessa Magnanimo (W, 1-1) and three from Schwartz (second save of 2023), held Texas State scoreless after Monticelli’s departure. Fascinatingly, each Badger arm threw exactly 30 pitches in the win. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Badger first baseman Katie Keller led the way with a double in a 3-for-3 performance. Shortstop Ellie Hubbard, who continues to improve at the plate, went 2-for-3 with a pair of RBI. Saturday: 7-4 L vs. Texas Molly Schlosser singled Kayla Konwent and Peyton Bannon home to give the Badgers a 1-0 first-inning lead. Things went downhill quickly for Wisconsin after that, though, largely due to defensive miscues. With two outs in the first, a Hubbard error opened the door for Texas’s Courtney Day to tie it with a two-run home run. Crane’s second-inning error led to two more unearned runs in a three-run frame for the Longhorns, who built a 5-2 lead. Salo’s tough-luck start ended after 1.2 innings with four unearned runs. Konwent hit a two-run shot in the fifth to bring Wisconsin within two, but Longhorn reliever Sophia Simpson entered for a three-inning, six-strikeout save to secure the win. Sunday: 7-6 W vs. Alabama Six lead changes highlighted a wild weekend finale versus the Crimson Tide. The game began in frustratingly familiar fashion for Wisconsin, as a Schlosser error led to an unearned run off Monticelli in her third start of the weekend. Wisconsin returned the favor in the fourth, when Skylar Sirdashney followed an error and a hit-by-pitch with a two-out, two-run double. The Tide responded in the bottom of the inning, though, regaining the lead and chasing Monticelli with a three-run home run. Crane and Angelopulos strung together two-out hits in a three-run fifth inning, which put the Badgers up 5-4. Alabama responded with a two-run shot, of course. Konwent’s second home run in as many games then put Wisconsin ahead for good. Schwartz (3-5) settled in after the fifth-inning home run and earned the victory with hitless sixth and seventh frames. Climbing the ranks Wisconsin’s 13-8 record may be too modest to justify a top-25 ranking at this point in the season. That said, the competitive showings versus ranked opponents suggested the 2023 Badgers can compete on a national level. The weekend would have been an even greater success if not for Wisconsin’s 11 errors in five games. Monticelli’s ERA rose to a disappointing 2.10 after her worst set of games to date. Still, the freshman has held her own against some of the nation’s best teams so far this year and should see no role reduction for now. As Salo’s sample size has grown, her performance hasn’t wavered. The sophomore boasts an absurd 0.68 ERA and 0.75 WHIP through 30.2 innings, and the impact of her emergence is twofold. For one, she’s delivering dominant outings like Friday’s versus Texas State, giving the Badgers a full game and then some to get their offense going. Also, Salo being a dependable starter allows coach Yvette Healy to use Schwartz primarily in a relief role, calling upon the trustworthy senior when Wisconsin needs her most. Wisconsin’s offense has benefited greatly from the development of the freshman Crane, who’s slashing .310/.375/.448 in 29 at-bats. The starting second-base job should be hers going forward, barring any major regression. Sirdashney’s surprising success as a leadoff hitter (.425 OBP), Keller’s continued excellence in the two-hole (.898 OPS) and Konwent’s usual power-hitting prowess (five home runs, 1.051 OPS) make the top of Wisconsin’s order a nightmare for opposing pitchers. After a mostly successful cross-country tour, the Badgers are finally ready to begin the Big Ten schedule. Their conference matchups kick off March 24-26 with a three-game set at Michigan State. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80
Photo by Maile Llanos | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE Is it possible to maintain friendships and family bonds when political opinions clash? As the holiday season ramps up, tension filled political discussions can turn family dinners into unexpected battlegrounds. By Alexandra Malatesta October 25, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Thanksgiving often brings a sense of dread. Not because of a burnt turkey, but due to the uncomfortable political discussions that split the table down the middle. It makes it really awkward to ask, “can you pass the gravy? ” after a heated conversation over whether abortion should be determined by the federal government or the states. This dynamic mirrors larger political divides in our society, which are undeniable. Political disagreements can strain relationships, whether you're arguing with your uncle about the significance of electing the first woman president or your cousin lecturing you on why “illegal aliens” should stay out of the country — we've all had our fair share of tension-filled conversations. As we navigate these charged conversations, it's worth examining the underlying currents that fuel our beliefs. Understanding the emotional and social factors at play might help us not just survive Thanksgiving dinner, but perhaps even find a common ground amid the clamor of clashing ideologies. A consistent question that runs through my head is: what drives us to believe what we believe, and how can we engage with one another without losing sight of the bonds that unite us? I vividly remember the moment I discovered my voice amid the political tumult of my upbringing. Growing up in a households steeped in politics — my father a former Secret Service officer, my stepmother an original staffer for former President Barack Obama and my “yaya” a fierce and confident woman always teaching me to stand up for my beliefs — meant I was politically motivated from an early age. I am surrounded by both sides of the political spectrum, which has not only tested my patience, but helped me develop a sense of what I believe in and learn how to approach heated political conversations more thoughtfully. From what I found most helpful navigating these situations, is that it requires setting healthy boundaries, knowing when to engage in discussions and when to step back, especially when emotions are high. It's crucial to choose the right time and context for these conversations, creating space for thoughtful, rather than reactionary, dialogue. Additionally, active listening plays a vital role, allowing you to understand the other person’s perspective, which is often shaped by personal experiences or fears. Finding common ground, such as shared values like fairness or community, can help bridge ideological gaps. Instead of trying to persuade, their viewpoint. It’s easy to get caught up in the symbols and ideologies that separate us, but it's essential to remember that behind every belief is a person, behind every vote, there are real-world consequences. At the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Larry Czeponis, an intelligent and witty teaching assistant in an elections and voting behavior political science course, shared an insightful perspective on this dynamic, highlighting the power of finding common ground in discussions even when there are stark differences. Czeponis told The Daily Cardinal he has always stood ground in his views since he was young, growing up progressive in a small conservative town. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “It's interesting with my friends, when we get back together…we just never talk about politics,” Czeponis said. In 2020, navigating political discussions in group settings posed challenges. Czeponis recalled feeling isolated in a group of 12 friends facing jokes and ridicule for his political views. “We both will agree that lower-income or middle-class people don't get a fair stake in government…Democrats and Republicans are beholden to corporate interests in some way,” he said. By recognizing that many people regardless of political affiliation have common concerns, Czeponis emphasized the possibility of productive conversations. “Everything in life is political, but life isn't all about politics,” he said. This perspective reminds us that while political beliefs inevitably influence many aspects of our lives, they should not define our entire existence, or determine the value of our relationships during Thanksgiving. Maeghan Chase, a confident and outspoken senior at UW-Madison, told the Cardinal that setting boundaries in relationships where political opinions clash is important. “I honestly think if people listened to each other and really tried to understand where the other was coming from, we’d realize we aren’t all as divided as we believe we are,” Chase said. Chase also said individuals should try to not interrupt one another during political discussions because it fosters a sense of being heard and understood, rather than the conversation becoming a battle of opinions. “It’s so important to let the other person say their perspective without being interrupted…this goes for friends, family, boyfriends, girlfriends, etc. And it's way harder than it sounds,” she said. She recalled a piece of advice from a former boss: “God gave us two ears and one mouth for a reason. Listen more than you talk.” This simple yet profound approach, Chase explained, not only applies to political conversations but is a valuable tool for maintaining healthy relationships in all areas of life. Over the years, I have observed that people find pride in their political stance, and when you disagree with their opinion, it's almost doing a disservice to their identity in a way. During election season, we see it everywhere — neighbors proudly displaying "Harris for President" yard signs, "Blue Lives Matter" flags on cars or wearing MAGA hats at the grocery store. Behind these symbols are people who take pride in their beliefs, or perhaps find a sense of belonging in something bigger than themselves. However, just like rooting for a favorite sports team, people rally behind their political causes. But sometimes, we lose sight of the fact that a presidential election isn’t a sporting match. It’s important to remember that, beneath the signs and slogans, these political decisions affect everyday people, we can't lose sight of the humanity at heart of these conversations, because that's what truly matters. Be proud of your voice, but don't waste any more time — nurture your family and friends, relationships are far more important than any debate. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
VOLLEYBALL Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State Badgers beat Spartans in four sets to finish third in the Big Ten Conference. By Carlos Bello December 7, 2024 | 9:57am CST No. 6 Wisconsin volleyball faced Michigan State at the Fieldhouse on Nov.30 to cap off the regular season and Big Ten play. With third place in the Big Ten already secured, the Badgers still played their starters on senior night, aiming to maintain a high NCAA tournament seed. The Spartans entered the match with a 6-13 Big Ten record and 13-18 overall. They failed to make the Big Ten tournament, so this matchup was their last of the season. Before the game, the Badgers honored seniors Sarah Franklin, Devyn Robinson, Anna Smrek, Julia Orzol, CC Crawford and Carly Anderson. In the first set, Wisconsin started with a 3-1 run, fueled by Spartan errors and a block from Franklin and Robinson. But Michigan State fought back, tying the game at 10-all with a 4-0 run. After head coach Kelly Sheffield issued a timeout, the Badgers responded with a 6-0 run, including two service aces from Crawford and two kills by Franklin. The Spartans narrowed the gap, but another 4-0 run by Wisconsin sealed the first set 25-19. The second set remained competitive, with neither team gaining a significant advantage. The Spartans held a 16-13 lead before the Badgers tied it on Crawford's kill. The teams continued to trade points, with momentum swinging back and forth. At the end of the set, the Badgers were down 23-22, but a 3-1 run gave them a 25-24 lead. The Spartans responded with their own run to take a two-point lead. Franklin answered with a kill, but two kills by Taylor Preston of the Spartans secured a 28-26 set two win for Michigan State. Wisconsin came out strong in the third set, building a 13-8 lead through two 3-0 runs. The Badgers maintained control, chaining points together while keeping Michigan State from going on any runs. The Spartans weren't done, though, as they fell behind 21-12 but went on a 5-0 run to get back in striking range. But, after a Sheffield timeout, the Badgers stopped the Spartans' momentum and won the set 25-19. Michigan State jumped to an early 5-2 lead in the fourth set. The Badgers responded with an 8-1 run featuring multiple kills from Franklin, an ace, block and kill from Orzol and multiple assists and a kill from freshman setter Charlie Fuerbringer. Wisconsin controlled the remainder of the set, chaining multiple points together and not allowing the Spartans to gain momentum. A kill from junior middle blocker Carter Booth sealed the set and match for the Badgers, 25-18. On senior night, the veterans shined. Franklin and Orzol led the team with 23 and 13 kills, respectively. Orzol, Crawford and Franklin each recorded multiple aces. Booth led all players with nine blocks, while Fuerbringer notched a season-high six. Saige Damrow continued her strong late-season play with a match-high 19 digs. The Badgers now turn their attention to the NCAA tournament, where they secured the No. 2 seed in the Lower Right Region. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
MARGOT ROBBIE as Barbie in Warner Bros. Pictures’ “BARBIE,” a Warner Bros. Pictures release. Photo by Courtesy of Warner Bros. Pictures | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘Barbie’ shows what it means to live in a woman’s world By Gabriella Hartlaub August 10, 2023 | 2:00am CDT At long last, a film has arrived that answers some of the greatest questions of our time: Who is Barbie? What is she about? Can she really do everything? And most importantly, what ever happened to the Barbie whose hair I cut off and whose face I drew on? The new hit film “Barbie” answers all these questions and many more in a fun and refreshingly subversive way. “Barbie” is a film that can be described using words like “pinkalicious,” beach and inescapable-thoughts-of-death. It’s safe to say those looking for a soulless IP film meant to advertise Barbie dolls, or parents preparing themselves for a 90-minute singing extravaganza a la “Frozen” may find this film is not what they thought it was. The film, directed by Greta Gerwig and co-written with her partner Noah Baumbach, follows a Barbie doll as she leaves the safety of Barbie Land and travels to the real world in order to seal a rift between the two universes. For those of us who subscribe to the church of Greta Gerwig, the surprisingly heavy themes of the movie should be no surprise. Gerwig is known for her examinations of womanhood. She’s also known for her show-stopping third act monologues which manage to animate the audience through either clapping or tears. Gloria (America Ferrera), a Mattel employee and Barbie enthusiast, delivers a similar monologue during the film. Ferrera had a standout performance that contributes a uniquely human perspective to the plastic world of Barbie. Gloria delivers a rousing speech on the experience of being a woman — complete with some intro to feminism lessons — in a way that makes you feel like you're being talked to instead of talked at. Gloria’s relationship with her daughter Sasha (Ariana Greenblatt) secures her a place in Gerwig’s fictional mothers hall of fame alongside Laura Dern from “Little Women”, and Laurie Metcalf from “Lady Bird”. If you hadn’t picked up on it already, “Barbie” is a film about womanhood. But the Barbie doll itself is a conundrum. Barbie is supposed to represent all women, but she only looked a certain way for a long time. She could do anything, but only within reason. She's independent, but somehow she always ends up looking after all of her friends and eventual younger siblings. In Gerwig’s Barbie Land, none of those contradictions exist. Barbie can truly be anything, and by some miracle, she’s respected as such no matter if her job is astronaut, construction worker or Nobel Prize-winning physicist (take that Oppenhiemer!). Though the film focuses on “Stereotypical Barbie” (Margot Robbie), it asserts Barbie can be anyone and features disabled Barbies, Barbies of all races and transgender Barbies. In my opinion, the film didn’t need to focus on a stereotypical Barbie, but I’ll be the first to admit the world is not quite ready for that yet. Still, in Barbie Land, the Kens are treated as an afterthought. In a twist from our reality, it’s the Kens who cheer for the Barbies as they play volleyball. Ryan Gosling’s “Stereotypical Ken” has a job that he describes as “beach… just beach,” and simply looks cool while the Barbies do their thing. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email I won’t lie, plenty of films have tried to critique sexism and misogyny through thinly veiled metaphors, or in this case a reverse of the issue itself. But Gerwig’s script makes the concept feel fresh. In the real world, a Mattel intern asks the CEO, “I’m a man with no power, does that make me a woman?” As the Kens rebel against their treatment in the second half of the film, we find that statement is untrue. This reveals another layer of the film's take on womanhood. When the Barbies were in charge, the Kens were simply out of mind and powerless, but not made to do anything they didn't want to. In the new “Kendom,” women are subjected like they are in the real world. They’re made to be less than Kens and forced to lose their homes and careers in favor of service to the Kens’ every need. Gerwig’s point is clear: Women are not men with no power. Rather, they are actively subjugated in both Kendom and in the real world. Our journey into this film runs parallel to Barbie’s journey into the real world. Stereotypical Barbie is disheartened to find that the real world wasn’t what she’d been told and that Barbie hadn’t fixed everything for women. “The real world isn’t what I thought it was,” she laments to Barbie creator Ruth Handler (Rhea Perlman). Perlman’s character smiles, and offers her a hidden piece of hope, “Isn’t that wonderful?” The real world isn't what Barbie thought it was, and this movie isn’t what many thought it was going to be. But throughout the film, which clocks in at a glorious hour and 45 minutes, it proves to be all the more wonderful for it. With Barbie, everything comes together: the writing, the acting, the amazing costume and set design and even the film's soundtrack—the standout being Billie Eilish’s “What Was I Made For?” that underscores a touching montage near the end of the film. “Who is Barbie?” is a question that becomes uniquely intertwined with another one by the end of the film: Who are we as women and as humans? Maybe it’s for the better that this particular question remains unanswered. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Creator Peter Kiesewalter and violinist Whitney La Grange. Photo courtesy of Peter Kiesewalter. ARTS The Moth Project to spread its wings at Overture Center Peter Kiesewalter of The Moth Project spoke with The Daily Cardinal about his influences for science-art fusion. By Sonia Bendre October 23, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The Moth Project, an original production composed of 12 songs set to moth videography, will show at the Overture Center for the Arts on Oct. 24 at 8 p.m. The 75-minute show features Grammy-nominated creator Peter Kiesewalter as pianist and his partner Whitney La Grange as violinist, both dressed in white. Throughout the show, images and videos of moths project onto a screen behind them. The media is from around the world, but many of the shots are from Kiesewalter’s own cottage in Canada. Kiesewalter first conceived of the idea during the COVID-19 pandemic, when he spent time at the cottage in Canada with his brother, an interpretive naturalist, and the two’s six collective children. Kiesewalter was out of work and worrying about how to pay rent. While at the cottage, his brother, usually a birder, picked up “mothing,” at one point documenting 87 species of moths in a single night. Kiesewalter was astounded. “I've been coming to this cottage for 45 years, and I didn't even know,” he said. “I thought there were the brown ones and the ones that eat your socks, basically.” He started paying attention, and over months of campfires, The Moth Project came together. Two years later, it aired for the first time at a town hall near the cottage. The second show was in Cleveland at the National Association for Interpretation Conference, where it received glowing reviews. Kiesewalter was inspired by a broader movement in science to use art to raise awareness of climate change, reaching people in a way that impacts them emotionally. “[Scientists] were saying, ‘we’ve got to figure out other ways to get the message across that the world needs our attention,’” he said. The Moth Project has since been presented at botanical gardens, academic conferences and theaters across Canada and the United States. The show contains covers and six original songs, inspired by classical, bluegrass and R&B music. Bach and Joni Mitchell covers play alongside original works with titles like “Emergence” and “Pheromones.” “That's by design, to reflect the diversity of the moth species,” Kiesewalter said. “There's 160,000 different moth species, so I thought that a show about or inspired by moths warranted a sort of eclectic musical palette. All the music in the show is from different parts of my musical education and upbringing.” Kiesewalter, who plays the clarinet, saxophone, piano and accordion among other instruments, currently resides in New York with La Grange and two of their children. He moved to New York after graduating from Ottawa University with degrees in classical clarinet and jazz saxophone performance. In New York, he found klezmer, a style of Jewish instrumental folk music. At various points in his life, he has also played jazz, Americana, bluegrass, Cajun and zydeco music. All of these, he says, feature to some degree in The Moth Project. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email From 1999 to 2005, Kiesewalter worked for ABC News as the resident composer, writing scores for films, shows and television productions. After working at ABC, Kiesewalter started a rock band called the East Village Opera Company that played modern renditions of classical opera music in German, Italian and French. The band signed a record deal with Universal Studios, received an Emmy Award and was nominated for a Grammy. Kiesewalter played with the East Village Opera Company for eight years. Since then, he has produced commercially and for individual artists. The Moth Project is a return to the road for Kiesewalter, and a welcome one. “I like the details of putting a show together and making things work smoothly,” Kiesewalter said. “I do still like getting in front of people and moving people… It fuels me.” Kiesewalter integrated the story of his parents’ immigration from Germany into the project, where he connected their migration to moth migration. “It's a pretty common story, like the migration story of lots of animals,” Kiesewalter said. “Migration stories are generally stories of: why do these animals or people move? The main reason is survival. Germany after the war was decimated. There was nothing.” His parents moved to Canada in the 1950s and “worked their asses off” to stay, Kiesewalter said. “All of the same things that affect the moth, or all of nature, affect my parents — life, death, transformation, metamorphosis, migration. It's a very personal show,” Kiesewalter said. Kiesewalter hopes The Moth Project will inspire viewers to pay more attention to nature for their own sake. “Being mindful of nature doesn't have to be a chore or an effort,” Kiesewalter said. “You don't have to do it for the benefit of the earth. Do it for the benefit of yourself, because the sheer beauty of it is all the reason we need to actually start treating the earth a little better.” In contrast to the negativity often surrounding climate change, Kiesewalter tries to employ the same messaging that ecologist and author Robin Wall Kimmerer uses in “Braiding Sweetgrass”: the Earth is a gift, and our connection to it is sacred. “Nature, moths, are incredibly beautiful. Pay attention to them for a sec, and it'll change the way that you integrate with the natural world,” he said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations Aaron Vieth will investigate Students For Justice in Palestine for allegedly violating Expressive Activity policy during their Dec. 5 protest on behalf of the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards. By Sreejita Patra December 6, 2024 | 12:38am CST The Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards (OSCCS) launched an investigation Thursday into University of Wisconsin-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) for allegedly violating the university’s Expressive Activity Policy during their protest at a Board of Regents meeting earlier that morning. A source familiar with SJP shared documents with The Daily Cardinal that said the organization may have violated the rules in the RSO Code of Conduct through the “use of university facilities and grounds,” “obstruct[ing] orderly conduct” and “fail[ing] to comply” with administration when around 50 protesters disrupted the Board of Regents meeting Thursday morning demanding the university financially and socially divest from Israel. Investigating Officer Aaron Vieth said in the documents the organization will face “further sanctions up to and including termination of RSO status” if he recommends them to be guilty of violations in probation requirements in effect since October and RSO Code of Conduct policy. Assistant Dean of Students and OSCCS Director Tonya Schmidt previously said in September that under normal circumstances she would recommend SJP be suspended as an RSO, but because campus administration and SJP struck a May agreement to end the pro-Palestine encampment, the university considered this a “mitigating factor” and approved a 10-month probation instead of suspension on Oct. 3, 2024. SJP is responsible for scheduling an investigatory interview by 4:30 p.m. on Dec. 15, 2024 and will have seven calendar days after Vieth’s recommendation to request a hearing for the case. If no hearing is requested by this deadline, Vieth’s recommendation will become the university’s final decision. Vieth said external judicial bodies may also investigate SJP or its members about the protest, and if the organization disbands during the disciplinary process, it may be added to the “Student Organizations Not in Good Standing” letter. “If this happens and Students for Justice in Palestine would like to become registered as a student organization again in the future, the organization will have to petition for reinstatement no matter what the outcome of the disciplinary process is,” Vieth said in the documents. University spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Friday that “UW supports the right to free expression within the bounds of the law and campus policy” and that the investigation and arrests were due to “disruptive behaviors” and violation of the Expressive Activity Policy. SJP spokesperson Dahlia Saba defended the protest and told the Cardinal Thursday that university police “brutally assaulted protesters and arrested 19 people seemingly at random.” WKOW-27 reported Thursday that protesters said police “forcibly slammed” a protester against a wall while following instructions to walk away. “SJP protested the business and finance meeting of the Board of Regents to demand that they disclose their investments and, in accordance with Wisconsin law, divest from companies complicit in Israeli apartheid,” Saba said. “Now, the university is again putting SJP through a disciplinary process to punish us for calling out the university’s unethical and illegal investment practices.” Wrists of protesters bleed due to tight zip ties used when they were arrested for breaking UW-Madison protest policy at the Board of Regents meeting at Gordon on Dec. 5, 2024. Courtesy of UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine/Instagram Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email SJP posted photos Friday of protesters’ wrists bleeding due to restraints after their arrests. UWPD spokesperson Marc Lovicott told the Cardinal Friday the police did not assault protesters and instead restrained them with handcuffs or “disposable flex-cuffs” which are similar to large zip ties. He said an officer accidentally “nicked the wrist” of a student while releasing them, but UWPD staff treated the injury. “This is a common tactic with this type of group we saw in May as well, where these just ridiculous, false claims are made,” Lovicott said. “I think the videos on social media speak for themselves as to how we tried to get protesters to clear the room so the meeting could legally go on as was needed.” UW-Milwaukee student and co-chair of Students for a Democratic Society Audari Tamayo was among the 19 people arrested earlier today. He called the investigation “bogus” and said UW-Madison’s Expressive Activity Policy, which puts restrictions on “expressive activity” within 25 feet of university buildings, essentially criminalizes protest on campus. “Across the country, SJP chapters are getting banned and investigated for standing up, fighting back and not taking no for an answer,” Tamayo told the Cardinal Thursday. “When all is said and done, the universities and anybody who restricted the ability of the community to protest are going to be on the wrong side of history. It’s not going to make us stop.” UW-Madison community and environmental sociology professor Samer Alatout, faculty advisor for SJP, said the university is “absolutely disgraceful” for “mak[ing] the issue about student disruption while a genocide is raging on in Gaza.” He said Palestinians are being “asked to disappear *poof* silently and without a whimper.” “Students are requesting for transparency of investment decisions, for UW Foundation to follow state’s laws which reject profiting from investments in companies that condone “discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, and sex,” Alatout said. “Genocide, as a matter of fact, violates all those provisions.” This story was updated at 1:36 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 6, 2024 to include Lucas' statement, corrections on RSO policy and additional claims from protesters surrounding UWPD conduct. This story was updated at 3:00 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 6 to include Lovicott’s statement and response to protesters' claims. College Editor Mary Bosch contributed reporting to this story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Sreejita PatraSreejita Patra is a senior staff writer and the former summer ad sales manager for The Daily Cardinal. She has written for breaking news, campus news and arts and has done extensive reporting on the 2024 presidential race. She also covered the Oregon Village Board for the Oregon Observer. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of Sachin Chheda IN-DEPTH ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Indian American Wisconsinites remain conflicted about Donald Trump’s reelection and party affiliation as the community’s political presence grows. By Sreejita Patra December 6, 2024 | 12:45pm CST On the evening of the election, University of Wisconsin-Madison sophomore Sandy Nayar was glued to the television at a party with a group of left-leaning, predominantly Indian friends. Partygoers were “full of hope” for Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris, Nayar told The Daily Cardinal, drawing up generously blue election prediction maps and preparing to take late-night shots for every state they got wrong. Nobody ended up taking any shots, as the party was over by 7 p.m. Indian Americans have historically sided with Democrats in local, state and national elections, despite the recent surge of prominent Indian American Republicans and nominees for President-elect Donald Trump’s cabinet. A 2024 survey of Indian Americans found 61% of respondents planned to vote for Harris just prior to the election, an 8% decrease from those who voted for President Joe Biden in 2020. But Trump’s reelection is a source of great contention among America’s second largest immigrant group with more Indian Americans than ever self-identifying on the ideological left while also leaving the Democratic Party in favor of independent affiliation or voting Republican. Indian Americans in Wisconsin spoke with the Cardinal about Democrats’ failures to invigorate voters, issues facing their community and how a second Trump presidency could shape America. Indian Americans expect changes in the Trump era but foresee rising political power Indian Americans like Kamala Harris, Nikki Haley, Jay Bhattacharya, Kash Patel and Vivek Ramaswamy have risen to become key players in national politics as part of the “largest and most politically active group among Asian Americans.” Sanchayita Kar and UW-Madison students Heba Haq, Arnav Mahajan and Nayar said they think the community will have a large role in both shaping and being shaped by the upcoming administration. “We’re the dark horses who nobody realizes until they see us at the top,” Mahajan said. “People are now starting to realize what we’re capable of.” Haq said she expects “more Viveks in the future” as Indian Americans prioritize class-based voting over social policy. And Sachin Chheda, former chair of the Milwaukee County Democratic Party, said he has witnessed the community’s economic interests diversify as the number of working-class Indian immigrants has increased. Indian Americans lean liberal, find Trump controversial Kar, a scientist living in Wisconsin since 1998, called Trump a “felon and sexual abuser” elected due to Americans’ distrust of women and Democrats being out-of-touch with the working class. She’s noticed his increasing popularity with young white Americans, particularly men. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I always thought, ‘well, educated white young people, why would they go for Trump?’” Kar said. “But there must be some kind of insecurity they have.” During a new Trump era, Kar fears funding cuts to scientific research in the Environmental Protection Agency, National Institutes of Health and Food and Drug Administration after witnessing a “steady decline” in scientific journals from India throughout the first Trump presidency, she said. Chheda thinks Trump does not align with Indian American values on issues such as racism, economics, immigration and women’s rights. Indian Americans and other minorities who voted for Trump are “pulling the ladder up behind them,” he said. “It’s the willingness of those who are already here to ‘other’ the people who come later, which is a constant in the American story,” Chheda said. But Mahajan voted for Trump despite “disturbing” felony convictions because he thinks his administration will follow through on his promise to grant green cards for foreigners who graduate from U.S. colleges after watching family friends go through years of “stressful” visa and green card renewals despite living long-term in the United States. “I started tuning it out at the end,” Mahajan said. “He has a lot of flaws, but he’s what the U.S. needs to ensure citizens and hard-working immigrants have economic prosperity.” Indian Americans criticize Democrats on foreign policy Widespread disillusionment toward Democrats’ stance on Israel’s war on Gaza may be an important factor in Indian Americans’ rapidly changing political identification since 2020. The percentage of Independents in the community has grown by 11%, and Republican Party affiliation has remained a consistent 21%. Mahajan chose to vote for Trump after seeing President Joe Biden’s handling of Israel’s war on Gaza, he said, primarily because the Democratic administration continued funding Israel and could not end violence in the region. “The Democrats should have resolved the war instead of just selling Israel a bunch of weapons and making money off of it,” Mahajan said. “Trump already reached out to [Benjamin Netanyahu] about bringing it to an end and that kind of immediate action is what moved me toward him. Maybe world peace is around the corner.” Kar, Nayar and UW-Madison junior Heba Haq also considered Israel’s war on Gaza to be a significant flaw in Democratic leadership, despite all voting for Harris. Eight of Haq’s extended family members “protest-voted” for Green Party candidate Jill Stein, she said. Nayar said she voted for Harris as “harm reduction.” “Democrats showed slightly less blood thirstiness for Israel’s constant genocide than Republicans,” Nayar said. “Kamala is still part of the bipartisan establishment, but I thought she would do less harm in office than Trump will.” The invisible hand: Discrimination within and without Despite growing dissatisfaction with the Democratic Party, Indian Americans remain unswayed by the Republican platform due to its association with white Christian nationalism. Haq told the Cardinal a close relative claimed he would vote Republican if Republicans “didn’t hate Muslims.” “They can get behind the religious elements of the Republican Party and their economic bullshittery, but the Muslim-banning turns some people off,” Haq said. “It doesn’t preclude them from voting for Trump, but it does mean they’re less likely to.” Chheda views racism toward South Asians as more explicit and accepted by Republican leadership than Democrats, though he “[doesn’t] think it’s zero on the left.” The experienced former political consultant and campaign director told the Cardinal he had dreams to run for and win political office when he was younger, but never did. “I'm not saying I forgive it, but I'm not going to spend every second of my day complaining about it,” Chheda said. “I've accepted there’s things I haven’t been able to do that I would have if I were the same person with the same story and a white dude with an American name.” Editor's Note: this article was updated at 3:30 p.m. CST on Saturday, Dec. 8, 2024, to clarify Kar's occupation. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Sreejita PatraSreejita Patra is a senior staff writer and the former summer ad sales manager for The Daily Cardinal. She has written for breaking news, campus news and arts and has done extensive reporting on the 2024 presidential race. She also covered the Oregon Village Board for the Oregon Observer. More Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations 19 arrested after pro-Palestine protesters interrupt Board of Regents meeting
Pro-Palestine protesters call for divestment outside of a Board of Regents meeting at Gordon Dining and Event Center at 8:00 a.m. on December 5, 2024. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS 19 arrested after pro-Palestine protesters interrupt Board of Regents meeting The University of Wisconsin-Madison Police Department arrested and detained 19 protesters at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. All were released without citations at this time. By Annika Bereny and Mary Bosch December 5, 2024 | 3:58pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison Police Department arrested 19 people at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. Thursday after 50 pro-Palestine protesters disrupted a Board of Regents meeting, demanding the university to financially and socially divest from Israel. Footage posted by Students for a Democratic Society Madison shows officers attempting to escort the group of protesters out of Gordon's. The protesters chanted “We won’t leave” as an officer said, “It’s time to go.” In the background, other members were being handcuffed and led out of another door as the larger group continued chanting “Free Palestine.” UWPD detained the 19 protesters in Gordon Commons for a short period, prompting social media posts from UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine and other groups urging people to call UWPD and ask for the release of those detained. All were released without citations at this time. A Daily Cardinal reporter saw seven or eight police cars in the parking lot outside Sellery Residence Hall at 9 a.m. After the disruption, police officers prevented the public and even some UW officials from accessing the Regents meeting, despite it continuing inside. A UW-Madison police officer said the situation represented a “safety issue” and that they could watch the livestream. A Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reporter reminded police the meeting is open to the public under state law and there didn't appear to be a sufficient safety issue for the meeting to be halted. The reporter was later let inside. About 15 of those protesting were students from UW-Milwaukee, where a dozen UWM protesters held a one-minute disruption at a Board of Regents meeting last spring. “It's been a year of this genocide — more and more people die every day that we don't take action," said Audari Tamayo, an arrested UW-Milwaukee protester. “And for that, they punished us.” UWPD said “each [of today’s] cases will be investigated, and citations could be issued in the future,” in a press release Thursday. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Study proposes paving, lighting Lakeshore Path Preliminary recommendations from a study on the Lakeshore Path including paving and lighting the path used by thousands of University of Wisconsin-Madison students and community members daily. By Noe Goldhaber November 18, 2024 | 2:00am CST Preliminary proposals from a Nov. 6 public feedback meeting for a Lakeshore Path study commissioned by the University of Wisconsin-Madison recommended paving and lighting the path used by thousands of students and community members daily. Consultants from landscape architecture group Damon Farber surveyed the portion of the path that runs from Willow Creek to the Limnology Building and analyzed feedback from campus community members. Preliminary recommendations, not directives for action, suggested adding lighting to Lakeshore Path in the “most sensitive and responsible” way possible. One option includes warm light along the portion of the path nearest to Lakeshore residence halls, which is low in sleep-disrupting blue hues, and minimal amber lighting on the Western portion of the path by Muir Woods for wildlife and aesthetic preservation. The study also recommends lighting reductions between midnight and 5 a.m. to help reduce wildlife disruptions, according to Senior Lighting Designer Holly Blomquist during a Nov. 6 public information meeting. For more than 30 years campus community members have pushed to light the path, which runs from the Lakeshore Nature Preserve to just past Memorial Union — called the “Rapeshore path” — because of safety concerns, District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal. The university has also heard concerns about safety “due to cyclist/pedestrian conflicts, uneven surfaces during winter and the variability of surfaces, markings and lighting along the path,” according to the report. UW-Madison and UWPD officials previously told the Cardinal the path was safe and recommended the path stay unlit to encourage students to walk in other areas at night. Community members have also previously raised concerns over wildlife disruptions with the lighting of the path. UWPD spokesperson Marc Lovicott told the Cap Times in October incident reports do not show a need to light the path but UWPD supports lighting the path “if lighting makes our community feel safer.” After Govindarajan worked to assemble a 2022 task force of campus representatives through his former role on the Associated Students of Madison, the group recommended a “feasibility study” on paving and lighting the path. He said he hopes the university goes forward with the recommendations. “I took the Lakeshore Path all the time as a freshman, it was dark as hell, it never felt safe for anyone taking it, especially when it starts getting dark at 4:30 p.m.,” Govindarajan said. The study also proposed two paving options aimed at balancing concerns over sharing the path with erosion risks. The first calls for an elevated walkway on the eastern portion of the study area along Muir Woods and a permeable asphalt and curb on the western portion near the Lakeshore residence halls. The second paving option addresses those who do not want the path to change by making smaller changes to asphalt and adds a running shoulder by Chamberlin Hall to address a particularly narrow section of the path. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email A final report will be released in early 2025 as the study wraps up public engagement meetings. Feedback can be shared by emailing communications@fpm.wisc.edu. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Noe GoldhaberNoe Goldhaber is the college news editor and former copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She is a Statistics and Journalism major and has specialized on a wide range of campus topics including protests, campus labor, student housing, free speech and campus administration. She has done data analysis and visualization for the Cardinal on a number of stories. Follow her on Twitter at @noegoldhaber. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
LIFE & STYLE UW-Madison student explores personal phone addiction in book 'Enemy in Your Pocket' University of Wisconsin-Madison Junior, Jackson Antonow wrote the book 'Enemy in Your Pocket' to share his journey from phone addiction to educating individuals on strategies to reduce their screen time and help their wellbeing. By Katherine McGrann November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST Your phone knows more about you than even your closest friends. University of Wisconsin-Madison Junior Jackson Antonow explores this reality in his book “Enemy in Your Pocket,” which details his journey with phone addiction and the benefits of breaking this dependence. From ages 12-19, Antonow averaged upwards of eight hours a day on his phone. But it wasn’t until he was a freshman in college that he realized he had an anxious addiction to scrolling aimlessly on his phone throughout the day. "I was really having these overwhelming feelings of anxiety, and it got to the point where it just really bothered me. And I don't think it was like this huge revelation at one point. But I was like, ‘my anxiety is interfering with my daily life,’" Antonow told The Daily Cardinal. "This just makes no sense on paper, and I wanted to look around and think about what I was doing in my life that was causing harm and causing these emotions. I started using my phone less, and everything changed dramatically." Antonow was inspired to write this book to help individuals who were experiencing anxiety and missing out on life like he was because of their phones. Antonow had researched extensively and read other books on phone addiction, but he felt as if all the books and articles were missing the perspective of a younger person. In “Enemy in Your Pocket”, Antonow combines personal stories with research to explore the impact of phone addiction. He conducted a study surveying individuals' screen time between the age range of 13 and 23. He found the average screen time is five hours and 32 minutes a day, which, spread over a lifetime, would total 15.05 years spent on your phone. Now, Antonow has limited his screen time to an hour per day, spending roughly 2.72 years of his life on his phone. He cut his screen time by redesigning his phone to make it less engaging — deleting unnecessary apps, including social media, and turning off notifications for non-immediate apps. Antonow's improved relationships and mental health result from limiting his screen time and staying away from social media, he said. With less time spent on his screen, he has found more time for new interests, increased productivity and strengthened connections with friends and family "I think it really improved my relationship with my parents because when I was coming home in high school, I'd be texting my friends, doing something on my phone. But now when I come home, it's like there's nothing on my phone or like my phone is away," Antonow said. "It's not like I have things to do besides talk to my parents or watch TV. I come home, and I have a conversation with my dad for around like four hours every single day in the summer." As our lives become increasingly consumed by technology, “Enemy in Your Pocket” serves as a timely reminder of the importance of balance and connections outside of a screen. "I think conversation is super important because it's almost like a book. At a certain point, it's like a lens of learning. That's how I think about conversation. And when you ask questions about people, you really get to understand their world views, and I talk about [this] through the book. But when you're on your phone, when you're in the car, with the Uber driver, you've lost every potential of any life experience they've ever had," Antonow said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Can the Badgers maintain their hot start as they enter Big Ten play? Predictions for the remainder of the Wisconsin men’s basketball regular season. By Daniel Desmond December 3, 2024 | 5:13pm CST The Badgers men’s basketball team is off to a surprising 8-0 start to begin the year and are currently ranked No. 11 in the most recent AP Poll. With a blowout win against Arizona and commanding victories over the University of Central Florida and the University of Pittsburgh to win the Greenbrier Tip-Off Tournament, the Badgers have an impressive early season resume. The Badgers are now set to enter their toughest stretch of the season, with their Big Ten conference schedule beginning at home against Michigan on Dec. 3. What to expect from the newly expanded Big Ten this year Oregon, Washington, UCLA and USC are all playing their inaugural seasons as members of the Big Ten conference. These new schools add to an already competitive year in the Big Ten, which is currently the only Division I conference where every team has five or more wins to begin the year. Additionally, 11 teams in the conference have one or no losses so far. Like the Badgers, Oregon is also off to a hot 8-0 start and are currently ranked No. 12 in the AP Poll. No. 8 Purdue, the consensus preseason favorite to win the Big Ten, are off to a strong 7-1 start. Before the season, Kevin Sweeney of Sports Illustrated predicted Rutgers would finish sixth in the Big Ten partly because the Scarlet Knights are led by Dylan Harper and Ace Bailey, two potential top-five picks in the upcoming NBA Draft in 2025. Overall, the Big Ten will be highly competitive, and there are no “layup” games for any team. What to expect from the Badgers in Big Ten play Last season, the Badgers’ Big Ten conference schedule was a grind. Wisconsin went 11-9 and had a stretch where they lost seven out of nine games. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email But this year’s roster is entirely different as Wisconsin lost and replaced eight players during the off-season. Despite the majority of the team having never played with each other before this season, Wisconsin’s offense is off to a tremendous start. The Badgers average 80.3 points per game, the 23rd highest average in the country. They lead the nation in free throw percentage (86.4%) and have the 19th highest offensive rating in the country, according to KenPom. Missouri transfer John Tonje has been the star of this potent Badgers offense. Tonje, who was named Big Ten Player of the Week the last two weeks, is averaging 22.9 points per game — the eighth highest out of any player in college basketball. Will the Badgers be able to maintain their high-level offense during Big Ten play? “It’s a long season. We’re not even a quarter of the way through it,” head coach Greg Gard said in a press conference following the team’s win over Chicago State on Saturday. “We'll get ready to jump into Big Ten play." When asked about tough shooting stretches and the offense becoming stagnant, Gard said, “Just keep playing, right?” “You know, there are gonna be ebbs and flows to the game. You make sure that you take care of the ball. But make sure you're getting the right shots,” he said. According to TeamRankings, the Badgers turn the ball over at the 14th lowest rate and have the 18th best turnover-to-assist ratio in the country. As experience with the Big Ten gauntlet has taught Gard and his staff, if the Badgers continue to have efficient possessions and maintain their low turnover rate, the offense can continue their success as they make their way through the conference schedule. Concerns ahead for Badgers on the road Last year, the Badgers went 3-9 on the road and shot 11 of their 14 lowest field goal percentages of the season at opposing and neutral sites. The Badgers have yet to take on an opponent’s home court this year, and their first big test will be this Saturday in Milwaukee against No. 5 Marquette. Later on in the season, the Badgers have a slew of really tough conference away contests. Strong performances on the road against Rutgers on Jan. 6, Purdue on Feb. 5 and Michigan State on March 2 will be pivotal to the Badgers’ hopes of winning a Big Ten regular season title. With the 18-team expansion of the Big Ten, the Badgers will travel all the way out to Southern California to take on both the University of Southern California and the University of Los Angeles in January. Big Ten play is always a challenge and there will be bumps along the way. However, if the Badgers can maintain their dominant offense and have players close out games in big moments on the road, this team has the potential to be atop the Big Ten standings and poised for a potential run in a Big Ten and NCAA tournament in March. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 19, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal OPINION The economic lie: We’ve been hijacked to believing Republicans are better for the country It’s time to reject the Reagan-era dogma of trickle-down economics and stop treating it as a permanent feature of American life. By Owen Puckett October 3, 2024 | 4:00am CDT It’s a common refrain in American politics: Republicans bring economic growth, while Democrats burden the economy with taxes, regulation and spending. This narrative has been reinforced for decades, ultimately shaping elections and voter perceptions. But when we look at the data, this belief doesn’t reflect reality. In fact, by most economic measures — GDP growth, job creation and stock market performance — the Democratic Party has historically outperformed the Republicans. So why, despite decades of evidence to the contrary, do so many Americans still believe Republicans are better for the economy? At the core of the Republican economic narrative is a simple and appealing formula: lower taxes and deregulation will lead to more growth. In theory, this approach sounds logical. If businesses keep more of their profits, they’ll invest more, hire more workers and stimulate the economy. This is the essence of “supply-side” or “trickle-down” economics, a theory that gained prominence during the Reagan years and has dominated Republican economic thinking ever since. Part of the appeal of this Republican economic policy lies in its immediate impact. Tax cuts provide instant gratification. You feel it in your paycheck almost immediately. Corporations report higher profits, and the stock market often rises on the news of corporate tax reductions. These are tangible, short-term wins that create the perception of economic growth. In practice, Republican administrations have presided over the start of the last five recessions. Reagan’s tax cuts combined with a significant increase in defense spending tripled the national debt during his presidency. George W. Bush turned the Clinton-era surplus into a massive deficit through tax cuts and wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Trump administration’s 2017 tax overhaul promised that corporate tax cuts would spark a wave of new investment and wage growth. Instead, it will cost $1.9 trillion over the next 10 years and more than triple the total value of tax cuts received by the top 1-5% of households than those with incomes in the bottom 60%. Though in theory tax cuts for the wealthy and corporations should provide long-term boosts, this has repeatedly failed in practice. As a result of cuts, the federal deficit typically expands, and the benefits of these cuts disproportionately go to the wealthiest individuals and largest corporations. According to a 2012 study by the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service, there is no significant correlation between lower tax rates on the wealthy and economic growth. Meanwhile, despite being branded as “tax-and-spend” liberals, Democratic administrations have often presided over more balanced and inclusive growth. Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal played a crucial role in pulling the country out of the Great Depression. Bill Clinton left office with a budget surplus following years of rapid economic expansion. Barack Obama inherited the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression and led the country through a sustained recovery that saw 75 consecutive months of job growth along with a significant reduction in the deficit. The evidence is undeniable: Democratic policies have generally been better for the broader economy – particularly for the middle and working-class Americans – tending to focus on policies that promote shared prosperity, from expanding access to education and healthcare to raising the minimum wage and protecting labor rights. Take the Obama administration’s investment in clean energy, health care and education through the 2009 stimulus package. Critics argued the stimulus didn’t do enough to immediately revive the economy, but these investments laid the groundwork for long-term growth, particularly in sectors that are now central to the U.S. economy. The persistence of the Republican economic myth is also fueled by the media ecosystem, particularly the conservative media. Right-wing media outlets like Fox news paint Democratic policies, particularly any form of government intervention or regulation, as inherently anti-business and damaging to growth. This selective storytelling reinforces the idea that the Republican economic policies are superior, even when the data tells a different story. Under Obama, for instance, the stock market more than doubled, unemployment plummeted, and the economy added millions of jobs. Yet conservative media consistently portrayed his policies as hostile to business and responsible for “slow” recovery. In contrast, during the Trump administration, even as deficits soared and the economy grew slower than under Obama, the narrative was that Trump’s policies were creating a “historic” economic boom. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email America didn’t always have an economy so skewed in favor of the rich. In fact, for much of the 20th century, the U.S. prospered under a tax structure that seems unimaginable today. During the postwar economic boom, top marginal tax rates reached over 90%, and yet this was a period of remarkable prosperity. The American middle class thrived, wages grew and the country built some of its most crucial infrastructure, from the interstate highway system to public universities. By gutting the progressive tax system, Reagan shifted the burden onto the middle and working classes, entrenching a trickle-down ideology that has left us with rampant inequality and increased national debt. And yet, the wealthy and corporations sold this model to the public as the only path to prosperity. They hijacked the narrative and branded high taxes and government intervention as “un-American” despite the fact that these very tools had built the most prosperous and equitable economy the country had ever known. This isn’t just a matter of failed policy — it’s a systemic campaign of corporate greed and manipulation. With their endless lobbying and political donations, corporations have convinced generations of Americans that reducing their taxes will somehow benefit the entire country, despite all evidence to the contrary. They’ve weaponized a false sense of economic freedom, framing any attempt to rein in corporate excess as a threat to individual liberty. The result is an economy that benefits the few at the expense of the many, with stagnant wages, weakened labor power and crumbling public infrastructure. But we must remember that these Republican policies are not a permanent feature of the American economy. They are not inevitable. We’ve been here before, and we know that the economy is not built on tax cuts and corporate profits alone. It thrives when there is real investment in people, when policies ensure that prosperity is shared across all income levels, and when the government plays an active role in balancing growth with fairness. These ideas, now framed as “radical” by Republicans, are rooted in the very policies that built America’s middle class. It’s time to reject the Reagan-era dogma of trickle-down economics and stop treating it as a permanent feature of American life. It was always a policy designed to serve the few at the expense of the many, and it always will be. It’s time we reclaim the tools that once built a fairer, more prosperous America. The future of the economy, and the well-being of millions of Americans, depends on it. The data, after all, speaks for itself. Owen Puckett is a senior studying political science. Do you agree that the Democratic party is better for the economy? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Alders introduce resolution to censure Ald. Charles Myadze following sexual harassment investigation District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan heads the initiative to censure District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze following a sexual harassment investigation that found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze guilty. By Marin Rosen November 20, 2024 | 6:13pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan, alongside eight members of the Madison Common Council and Mayor Satya-Rhodes Conway, introduced a resolution Wednesday to censure District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze following a sexual harassment investigation. The investigation found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze broke state law despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them. One of the women was District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett, who said in a statement Thursday Myadze “persisted and refused” to respect her boundaries on multiple occasions and threatened her after seeking guidance on the situation. The initial investigation into Myadze conducted Aug. 9 found sufficient evidence of workplace hostility and harassment, but was recently revised after Myadze’s attorney requested the case be reopened. “The City should be a safe work environment,” Govindarajan said in a Wednesday post on X. “The patterns of unethical behavior we've seen are unbecoming of an alder, and Myadze should resign immediately.” The incident did not qualify as workplace harassment because Myadze’s behavior did not disrupt the women’s ability to perform their jobs, according to the investigation. While a censure will not remove Myadze from the Common Council or committees, Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal he moved to censure because “it is the right thing to do.” “When the Common Council gets together, and if they vote in favor of this, they are saying we disapprove of it,” Govindarajan said. “It is not what an alder should be doing. It is inappropriate.” Bennett, District 5 Ald. Regina Vidaver, District 3 Ald. Derek Field, District 16 Ald. Jael Currie, District 17 Ald. Sabrina V. Madison, District 6 Ald. Marsha A. Rummel, District 4 Ald. Michael Verveer, Council President Yannette Figueroa Cole and Rhodes-Conway sponsored the resolution. Bennett previously told the Cardinal that legal reform is in order because women in these situations are often conditioned to “keep the peace” and remain cordial during abuse. Because independent elected officials, such as alders, are not under the same jurisdiction as city employees, the city cannot hold alders to the same standards as city employees, according to a statement from Rhodes-Conway. “If the same behaviors that Ald. Myadze engaged in was done by a [city] department head, that person likely would face anything from a simple warning to termination,” Govindarajan said. “But because of the fact that this conduct was conducted by an alder, there's no real way to hold that person accountable other than censuring them.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Govindarajan told the Cardinal he believes the best thing for Myadze to do is resign immediately. “Let’s take any constituents, and hypothetically they have experienced sexual harassment or domestic violence,” Govindarajan said. “How are they going to reach out to their alderperson if that alderperson is known to be sexually harassing folks? That is a disservice that Charles Myadze is doing to his own constituents.” The resolution will be formally introduced at the council meeting Nov. 26 and voted on Dec. 10, according to Govindarajan. Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A photo of a Thanksgiving feast. Photo courtesy of Christopher Schmidt/Flickr SCIENCE Why does Thanksgiving dinner leave us so sleepy? The science behind post-Thanksgiving meal drowsiness. By Lindsay Pfeiffer November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST Thanksgiving is one week away, and with it comes time spent with family and friends, plentiful meals and the infamous Thanksgiving fatigue. But what exactly is the cause of this? Turkey contains tryptophan, which is an essential amino acid. It can be converted into a molecule called 5-HTP, which forms serotonin, a neurotransmitter that influences mood. Some of that serotonin is then converted into melatonin, which is important for circadian rhythm synchronization. Melatonin isn’t required for sleep, but at high levels, it increases sleep quality. Tryptophan isn’t naturally produced in the body, so we have to get it from our diet. Tryptophan is in all meat — turkey actually doesn’t contain any more than other meats. Three ounces of turkey has approximately 180 to 244 milligrams of tryptophan, while tryptophan supplements taken for sleep improvement typically are 5,000 milligrams. This means you’d have to eat up to 84 ounces of turkey to get to the same amount as a tryptophan supplement. What is the true Thanksgiving fatigue culprit? Multiple factors create post-meal drowsiness, and it’s simpler than you’d think. Thanksgiving dinner often includes large quantities of carbohydrates in the form of stuffing, pie, rolls and mashed potatoes. This can spike your blood sugar at first and later cause it to crash, making you feel sluggish. Additionally, there’s an increase in blood flow to your stomach to help deal with the large amount of food ingested. This leaves you feeling tired because there’s less blood in your brain. Your heart rate also drops as you relax to digest the food. The time of year also plays a role in post-meal sleepiness. November is accompanied by early darkness. The pineal gland, an endocrine gland in the brain, releases more melatonin when it’s dark. So, when Thanksgiving dinner takes place right before or when it’s dark, your body’s production of melatonin can leave you feeling groggy. Any alcohol consumed may make you feel more lethargic due to its depressant qualities. Once in the bloodstream, alcohol slows down neuron firing in the brain, resulting in relaxation and drowsiness. Its effects can also increase with overeating. How can you avoid post-meal fatigue this Thanksgiving? To stay alert after your Thanksgiving meal, try eating more slowly, avoiding overeating and limiting your alcohol. A post-meal walk can help regulate blood sugar and aid in digestion. Getting a good night's sleep beforehand can also help keep your energy levels up. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Melissa Agard speaks at a TAA - AFT outside of the Board of Regents meeting on August 22, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Melissa Agard wins Dane County executive race Sen. Melissa Agard, D-Madison, defeated Dane County Supervisor Dana Pellebon for the county’s top seat Tuesday night. By Joseph Panzer November 5, 2024 | 11:35pm CST In a special election on Tuesday night, Sen. Melissa Agard, D-Madison, won the Dane County executive race over challenger Dana Pellebon. Agard received 61% of the vote at 74.6% of precincts reporting — a 23.3% margin over Pellebon’s 37.7%. Declaring victory in a speech at the Embassy Suites hotel in downtown Madison, Agard affirmed her interest in finding togetherness as executive. “We are one community and with a shared set of values grounded in equity, in progress and innovation, we can move our county forward,” Agard said. The election was called after former Dane County Executive Joe Parisi announced in October 2023 that he would be retiring. Since stepping down in May, the position has been filled by former Dane County Supervisor Jamie Kuhn. Agard and Pellebon landed on the ballot after defeating candidates Wes Sparkman and Regina Vidaver in the August primary. The county executive is responsible for overseeing county government departments, approving or vetoing resolutions from the Board of Supervisors and submitting the annual budget to the county board. Agard previously told the Cardinal that as county executive, she will prioritize including student perspectives on housing affordability issues to address cost of living concerns. In a Q&A with the Cap Times, Agard has also said that addressing climate concerns, racial disparities and prioritizing workforce development and small businesses will be goals of her administration. Agard will serve until the end of Parisi’s term in April 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Colin Farrell in Max's "The Penguin." Photo courtesy of Macall Polay/HBO. ARTS The Penguin is horrible. That’s what makes ‘The Penguin’ amazing Lauren LeFranc’s spinoff of Matt Reeves’ 2022 film “The Batman” is one of the best shows of 2024. By Oliver Gerharz November 23, 2024 | 2:00am CST This review contains major spoilers for “The Batman” (2022) and minor spoilers for the earlier episodes of “The Penguin” (2024). For the last 40 years, the top hat-and-monocle-wearing Penguin has been swinging around his weaponized umbrella in bird-themed duels with Batman. Max’s 2024 miniseries “The Penguin” ditches these parts of the character to show a more revoltingly evil version than usual. The show, a TV spinoff/follow–up to Matt Reeves’ 2022 oscar-nominated superhero movie “The Batman,” recently finished its eight episode run. “The Penguin” quickly reintroduces its title character, a mobster named Oz Cobb (Colin Farrell) who waddles like a penguin because of an untreated foot deformity. The ableist nickname constantly upsets Oz’s pride, one of the main drives and a frequent breaking point for his character. “The Penguin” is yet another show starring an egomaniac in organized crime. But its shoulder-rubbing with the superhero genre gives it an excuse to be stranger and more eccentric than shows like “The Sopranos” or “Breaking Bad.” But that doesn’t mean that the Penguin is any less insidious as his crime drama contemporaries. In “The Penguin,” Oz feels far removed from his 1941 comic book origin. Small changes like the truncation of last name “Cobblepot” to just “Cobb” lend to the reality established in “The Batman.” Ultimately, this version of the Penguin brings a depth to the character that feels honest to Oswald Cobblepot while still taking the creative liberties it needed to in order to create an incredible protagonist. Oz works for the Falcone crime family, but after the death of patriarch Carmine Falcone (played by John Turturro in “The Batman,” but Mark Strong during flashbacks in “The Penguin”) he is emboldened to try and push his way to the top. Oz’s goals contradict those of the new Falcone leadership: Carmine’s son Alberto (Michael Zegen) and Carmine’s daughter Sofia (Cristin Milioti), who was recently released from Arkham Asylum after serving a decade for a string of murders. This conflict comes to the forefront when Oz snaps and murders one of his fellow members of the Falcone mob. To help hide the body from the Falcones and the police, Oz recruits a young man he finds trying to steal one of his tires. From that point on, Victor Aguilar (Rhenzy Feliz) becomes Oz’s sidekick as he pits the Falcone and Maroni crime families against each other. As the show goes on, Victor, Sofia and Oz are all precisely characterized, each having their own dedicated arc. The slow and deliberate drip of new details keeps the audience in suspense as to the true motivations and origins of the three main characters, layering the past with the present to create an intense and focused drama. Aside from the stars, one other performance that it would be negligent not to mention is Clancy Brown’s chilling portrayal of Salvatore “Sal” Maroni, the patriarch of the Maroni family and one of the main antagonists. Sal is scarily resilient and uniquely hateful, creating the feeling that his defeat would be impossible. During “The Penguin,” Oz is constantly driven by a desire for others’ approval. This heavily influences one of the most fascinating and complex relationships in the show, the one between Oz and his mother Francis (Deirdre O’Connell). Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Francis is old and sick and constantly tells Oz how much more he could be doing for her. One warning sign of her more toxic traits comes when she calls him a “pussy” for being evasive with his mob enemies rather than killing them head-on. In the end, Francis and Oz’s mother-son relationship is irreversibly transformed by flashbacks in the final episodes of the show. Throughout the show, Oz is given plenty of heartfelt and loving moments with those around him. He is an inspiration to kids like him from crappy neighborhoods who could barely dream of rising as high as Oz — or at least that’s what he tells himself. Despite these moments, as the final credits roll on “The Penguin,” it’s hard to think about anything besides how evil he is. In the end, the only thing that really speaks to how evil the Penguin is the feeling deep in your gut as you watch the final scenes play out. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Courtesy of jv394587/Flickr ARTS Wes Anderson’s newest movie ‘Asteroid City’ shoots for the stars and hits By Paige Stevenson July 18, 2023 | 2:00am CDT Eclectic writer and director Wes Anderson added science fiction and western to the vast list of genres he mastered with his newest film “Asteroid City” when it released on June 22. Filled with Anderson’s unique style, humor and ability to stack a cast, “Asteroid City” is rich in emotion, relatability and even a bit of existentialism. As a longtime fan of Anderson’s movies, I eagerly awaited this newest addition to his collection. His films are extraordinary for plot and substance but especially their vivid colors, use of symmetry and overall cohesive style, which make each of his films instantly recognizable as a “Wes Anderson movie.” But Anderson’s movies aren’t always for everyone. If you’re not used to his quick, flat sense of humor or odd storylines, you might leave the theater feeling confused and lost within his pieces. “Asteroid City,” while beautiful, was a movie that made even me go back and think about certain parts. Loosely, “Asteroid City” follows a family of four and their arrival in the titular Asteroid City for a junior science convention set in the American desert of the 1950s. While there, they explore their relationships both with themselves, other junior science lovers and even aliens. I was reminded of the humor and antics of “Royal Tenenbaums” and “Fantastic Mr. Fox” while watching the film due to the film’s clever one-liners and focus on family issues. But I found more similarities in terms of cinematography with “The Grand Budapest Hotel” and “The French Dispatch.” Maybe it was the color scheme or overall filming, but “Asteroid City” had the two-dimensional feel and vibrancy of “The Grand Budapest Hotel” while also exploring the emotional depth and storytelling capacities of film noir. Such a technique illuminated certain ideas to audience members, while hiding the very same details from characters. This trait mimicked cinematography found in “The French Dispatch,” but I felt it worked better in Anderson’s most recent movie because it acted as a narrator who fit in with the overarching plot rather than being a standout scene or idea. Narrators are common in Anderson’s movies, but “Asteroid City” was unique in that its narrator had a subplot that stood on its own and added insight into the decisions and actions of the main characters. Other Anderson movies like “The French Dispatch” tried a similar idea but without the depth found in “Asteroid City.” However, this switching from black-and-white to color, or subplot to the main plot, was slightly confusing at times. Even when the grayscale scenes spoke about the main plot, it felt like an entirely different story and struggled to fit cohesively with the colored scenes. While this may have been intentional — and surely felt that way toward the end of the film — it was a little difficult to get used to. I thought this change in color grading worked particularly well in scenes that involved more introspective examinations of the movie. Lines delivered by these characters seemed to look inward into Anderson himself or the fears of the audience. Without giving too much away, these scenes offered a reassuring voice to sooth the feelings of doubt that often accompany mold-breaking actions and creative endeavors. The line “your pictures always play,” said by Jason Schwartzman’s character, stood out to me as a self-reference by Anderson. Even though his movies get produced and do well at the box office, the line hints he may have some doubt for their success as he constantly challenges the conventions of modern filmmaking. Aside from its examination of the self and self-doubt, “Asteroid City” also speaks to greater issues of acceptance and empathy, especially in a time where so many lose out on respect due to race, sexual orientation or gender and many other reasons. While Asteroid City’s characters may have been talking about an alien, their acceptance and empathy for a creature unknown to them could inspire audience members to do the same in the future. Subtle calls to areas where people may not feel respected was a nice touch, including many references to queer relationships and immigrants. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Like other Anderson films, the acting in “Asteroid City” is nothing short of well done, and it was fun to pick out recurring actors like Tilda Swinton, Adrien Brody and Schwartzman, who’s been in almost every Anderson film to date. There are also new faces, most notably Tom Hanks, Scarlet Johansson and Maya Hawke. Hanks’ character mimicked many of the roles played by Bill Murray in other Anderson films as he took the persona of an aloof father-in-law more worried about himself than others. Additionally, Steve Carrell made an appearance, bringing the signature sense of humor he’s best known for without feeling out of place in an Anderson movie. Overall, I thoroughly loved Anderson’s newest movie, “Asteroid City” for its pastel vision of the wild west, its subject matter and relatability while also feeling otherworldly. His films are truly works of art appreciated for their creativity and style, even by those who don’t always seek out his movies. Bold but playful, “Asteroid City” showcased Anderson’s creativity as a director and writer. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Tammy Baldwin speaks at the Obama-Walz campaign event on October 22, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Baldwin narrowly wins reelection bid against Republican Eric Hovde In a razor-thin race, U.S. Senator Tammy Baldwin secured victory against Eric Hovde in one of the most competitive 2024 Senate races. By Iain Chang November 6, 2024 | 9:46am CST U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin narrowly beat Republican challenger Eric Hovde on Tuesday, securing a third Senate term. “The people of Wisconsin have chosen someone who always puts Wisconsin first,” Baldwin said in a statement. As of 8:33 a.m. Wednesday, Baldwin secured around 27,000 more votes than Hovde in one of the 2024 elections' most competitive races. Wisconsin’s U.S. Senate race was tracked as one of the critical races in determining the post-election Senate majority. The October Marquette Law Poll had Baldwin leading Hovde 51% to 49%, six points less than her lead in August. Baldwin’s race was the seventh most expensive race in the nation, raising over $66 million between the two candidates. By the end of October, Baldwin managed to out-raise Hovde by $10 million in campaign contributions. However, Hovde outspent Baldwin by $6 million in TV advertisements between Oct. 14 and Election Day, according to the Associated Press. Baldwin outperformed Vice President Kamala Harris, who was losing her bid for the presidency to former President Donald Trump by more than 32,000 votes in the state. Earlier Tuesday, Baldwin told The Daily Cardinal she believed the record high early voter turnout was a good sign for her race. She said the reports of record early voter turnout has been “amazing” and believed it was a good sign for her race. Baldwin’s campaign focused heavily on restoring abortion rights, a critical issue among Wisconsin voters. When the Supreme Court ended constitutional protections for the procedure in June 2022, an 1849 law banning abortions with no exception for rape or incest went into effect in Wisconsin. Baldwin also focused her campaign on highlighting authorship of the Women’s Health Protection Act, a Senate bill that would restore nationwide abortion access and restore protections for abortion. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Iain ChangIain Chang is a senior staff writer at The Daily Cardinal covering state news and politics. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin wins Greenbrier Tip-Off, continues incredible start to the season With wins over UCF and Pitt, Wisconsin improves to 7-0 for the first time since the 2014-15 season. By Jacob Szczap November 27, 2024 | 5:06pm CST With two impressive victories over the University of Central Florida and the University of Pittsburgh last weekend, the Wisconsin men’s basketball team won the Greenbrier Tip-Off Tournament, starting their season 7-0, and continued to make a name for themselves in college basketball’s opening month. Entering the season with an unproven, new-look team, No. 15 Wisconsin was picked by national pundits to finish toward the end of the Big Ten. But as their torrid start to the season continues, Wisconsin's performance over the weekend in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia is their latest showing that proves they are a team that cannot be ignored. The Badgers beat UCF 86-70 on Friday and then defeated Pittsburgh 81-75 on Sunday to clinch the tournament championship. With their victory over Pittsburgh, Wisconsin is now the only team in the country with multiple wins over teams ranked in the KenPom Top 25. Led by guards John Tonje and John Blackwell, Wisconsin’s offense has continued to put impressive numbers on the board. Over the weekend, Tonje added to his incredible start to his Wisconsin career, taking home Tournament MVP honors after scoring 33 points and grabbing seven rebounds Sunday. Tonje scored 15 points along with six rebounds against UCF on Friday. With his performance Sunday, Tonje became the first player in the Big Ten this season to record multiple 30-point games. Tonje has reached double figures in every game this season for Wisconsin and has reached 15 points in all but one. He is now averaging 21.3 points per game, third in the Big Ten. Tonje delivered a heartfelt message after the game in an interview. “I just want my teammates to know that I’m here to build lifelong relationships, and I think they’ve embraced me and the city’s embraced me,” he said. “I’m just doing everything I can to compete for the name on the front of the jersey, and it’s been amazing so far.” Blackwell continued his hot start to his sophomore season, averaging 15.5 points, four rebounds and a steal over the weekend, earning All-Tournament Team honors. Forward Nolan Winter and guard Kamari McGee also had memorable weekends for the Badgers. Winter followed up a 13-point and 10-rebound double-double on Friday with an 11-point performance on Sunday, marking the first time in his career he has put up double figures consecutively. Meanwhile, with 14 points on Friday and 10 on Sunday, McGee posted his first back-to-back double-digit scoring games with Wisconsin. McGee played previously at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. McGee, now in his senior season, has emerged as an invaluable part of Wisconsin’s team. In the 23 games in which McGee has played at least 10 minutes, the Badgers are 20-3 and 16-0 dating back to last season. Head coach Greg Gard has emphasized the importance of offense in today’s era of college basketball, and seven games in, he has received contributions down his roster. Wisconsin’s victories over the weekend emphasized its ability to score and that they must be taken seriously as the Big Ten season approaches. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Wisconsin Tuition Promise to cover the cost of low-income students at UW System campuses. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Cardinal View: UW-Madison expression policies shape debate on only their terms. This restricts student dialogue In wake of the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s new expressive policy and neutrality statement, The Daily Cardinal believes these sentiments disregard the Wisconsin Idea and could censor important student protests. By The Daily Cardinal Editorial Board October 29, 2024 | 11:29am CDT In the wake of student demonstrations last semester, officials at the University of Wisconsin-Madison have updated their policies regarding expressive speech on campus and public statements as an institution. While the university champions the free discussion of ideas in our campus community, the reality of these policies tells a different story — one that stands against the Wisconsin Idea. In August, the university released the updated policy, now called the Expressive Activity Policy, to clarify restrictions of protesting on campus while also reiterating current policies. This includes restricting expressive activity — which can include protests, speeches and chants — within 25 feet of all university building entrances, limitations on size for indoor signs, restrictions on certain sound amplifications and restricting activities in certain areas on campus, like the Abraham Lincoln Statue, during certain hours of the day. The policy also outlines how UWPD is able to extend the 25-foot distance further if safety is at risk. In concept, the new student demonstration guidelines are designed to safeguard students’ right to safely protest. In practice, the Expressive Activity Policy has the possibility to not only restrict student expression, but stand in direct opposition to the university’s mission of fostering the Wisconsin Idea “that education should influence people’s lives beyond the boundaries of the classroom.” The university’s new Expressive Activity Policy forces students to reconsider the consequences of fighting for change, potentially creating a chilling effect out of fear student protesters could violate unclear rules. As student demonstrators reconsider their involvement in expressive political action, the administration has placed an important asterisk on the Wisconsin Idea — education should influence people’s lives beyond the classroom, but only on their terms. “The robust exchange of ideas and viewpoints is central to a university,” said Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin in a UW-Madison statement following the policy release. “That means that we will often engage with ideas and perspectives that may be new to us, and that might, in some cases, cause us unease or discomfort.” At face value, this makes sense. But, the question still remains: what’s the difference between a “robust exchange of ideas” and student demonstrations now deemed to be unacceptable? Moreover, is meaningful change always possible when activism is limited to a roundtable discussion tucked away in a university building? Following the updates to the Expressive Activity Policy, the university released the Institutional and Public Positions Statements policy, outlining when and how university officials will consider and institute public statements. The new policy determines university response on whether or not the topic directly impacts the “core mission or operations of the university or one or more of its units.” Once again, the guidelines of this new policy are ambiguous. By leaving statements up to the discretion of the university, it also sets up zero expectation for the university to address current events that deeply affect the wellbeing of the student body. What could be considered an impact to a “core mission or operation of the university?” “When the institution takes a point of view on a matter of public concern or controversy, however well intended, it risks crowding out other points of view… it risks harm to one of the most core and fundamental dimensions of a university: free and open debate,” Mnookin wrote in an email to students and staff. UW-Madison withdrawing itself from making statements is not the best way to encourage free and open discussions on campus. Students and community members alike should have the opportunity to critique and challenge statements made by the university, because those challenges have the possibility to spark meaningful changes on the institutional level. When it comes to addressing current events, the role of the university isn’t to serve as the final arbiter of right and wrong for the student body, but that doesn’t mean the institution should always pursue neutrality, especially when determined by a standard that’s unclear to the student body. Ideally, the university should be one of many voices in the “robust exchange of ideas” taking place on campus. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The bottom line is, when the university takes a stance, they take a risk — but if meaningful campus discourse in pursuit of the Wisconsin Idea is the priority, it’s one worth taking. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of A24 ARTS Zac Efron strikes his iron claw into viewers’ hearts Inspired by the famous Von Erich wrestling clan, “The Iron Claw” balances high-action fight scenes with sob-worthy moments. By Bryna Goeking February 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST I wasn’t expecting a movie packed with sweaty muscular dudes, 1980s rock music and teenage heart-throbs inspired by a Texan wrestling family to make me sob so hard I couldn’t stop coughing. But “The Iron Claw” is more than just a battle of wrestlers. It’s a battle of toxic masculinity and generational trauma among family members, stuff you can’t beat by physical force alone. In a story known all too well, the movie follows the lives of brothers falling apart under pressure to be the toughest and the strongest. Zac Efron, who stands out as Kevin Von Erich, watches three of his brothers meet their end, all in one way or another related to torment and abuse from their father. Kevin Von Erich was always told his family was cursed, a myth that felt all too real following the death of his older brother at five years old. His father, Fritz Von Erich, taught him and his brothers the only way to survive the curse was to be “the toughest, the strongest.” For the Von Erich brothers, failure in wrestling was a manifestation of failure in manhood. The brothers struggled to talk about their feelings or seek help for extreme stress. Their family encapsulates toxic masculinity, modeled by their father. The brothers all struggle with some form of depression, chronic stress and substance abuse as a result. David Von Erich is perhaps the most pertinent example of the risks of toxic masculinity. His death occurs the night before the heavyweight championship, the most important fight of his career. In the movie and in real life, he died from acute enteritis, an easily treatable condition he ignored to continue wrestling. “The Iron Claw” breathes new life into the story of the Von Erich family and provides a fresh perspective on how ideas of gender and masculinity have changed since the late 20th century. It reminds viewers of the importance of men’s mental health and that being physically strong is nothing without strong mental health. In recent years, male athletes have begun speaking out about their struggles with mental health — a cultural code that suggests a growing openness toward these issues. From Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson to Michael Phelps to Dak Prescott, male athletes are pushing back against the narrative that they must always be the strongest to be the best. “The Iron Claw” is perhaps the only movie this year that can transition flawlessly from intense, high-action wrestling to grave funerals. The aggression of wrestling is seamlessly interwoven with tense, emotional moments against Fritz. The film is cast to perfection, with Efron delivering a career-defining performance. Jeremy Allen White, Harris Dickinson and Stanley Simons bring distinct energies to each of the brothers that viewers can understand with little exposition. Lily James, who plays Kevin’s wife, shines as the emotional heart of the film, often functioning as the only character with any level of emotional intelligence. In the penultimate scene, the deceased brothers reunite in a peaceful afterlife. Away from the torment of their father and the grueling expectations of toxic masculinity, the end result of happiness is cathartic after seeing the characters struggle for so long. Watching Efron as Kevin Von Erich in the final scene finally break and allow himself to cry and feel the misery of the past two hours inspires a sense of hope — maybe he can rise above the curse of his father. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Von Erichs may be remembered as a powerhouse wrestling family, but “The Iron Claw” will be remembered for its artful dismantling of toxic masculinity. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of Michael Cheng via Flickr CITY NEWS Madison Sourdough employees petition to unionize after owner declined to voluntarily recognize union Approximately 40 of the employees at the bakery will be able to vote on whether to form a union. By Francesca Pica March 3, 2023 | 4:30pm CST Employees at Madison Sourdough filed a petition to unionize with the National Labor Relations Board Monday. On behalf of the employees, representatives for the United Food and Commercial Workers Union (UFCW Local 1473) requested that the bakery, located on Madison’s east side, recognize the union. However, ownership declined. A Madison Sourdough employee, who requested anonymity out of fear of retaliation, told The Daily Cardinal that Madison Sourdough owner Andrew Hutchison refused to voluntarily recognize the union. “He’s acknowledged that the majority of workers want to join UFCW Local 1473, and he stated that he doesn’t want our relationship between him and between the employees to become adversarial,” the employee said. “But, despite that, he’s refused to voluntarily recognize our clear desire to unionize.” Andrew Hutchison told the Cap Times he believes a union would interfere with the relationship between him and his employees. “A union introduces uncertainty,” Hutchison said. “I have to work through an organization … [and] I didn’t have a choice in the matter. I inherently don’t trust that.” The employee said the owner also sent a company-wide correspondence that said a third-party union “will alter the worker-employee relationship.” “The union is not some scary, nebulous third party coming in to change things,” they said. “It’s us, it’s the supermajority of us, and we’re ready to take a seat at the bargaining table and negotiate for a fair contract.” Hutchison requested that a secret ballot election be conducted by the NLRB to determine whether staff members will unionize. Approximately 40 employees will have the ability to vote on whether to form a union, according to union representative Justin Benzschawel. This excludes owners Andrew and Emma Hutchison, as well as Molly Maciejewski, executive chef and kitchen and café executive director of operations, and Carly Rossmeissl, bread, pastry and delivery operations director. Madison Sourdough Creative Director Emily Hutchison said the decision to hold an election would ensure all employees will have the ability to decide whether to unionize. “We want to make sure that all voices are heard, so we have requested an election,” Hutchison said. “This decision will impact all of our employees, so we want to make sure it is decided by all of our employees.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Hutchison said supervisors will be willing to negotiate with the union if it is approved by the workers. “If a majority of our staff chooses to be represented by a union, we will absolutely negotiate in good faith with that union,” Hutchison said. The Madison Sourdough employee said the terms staff members are bargaining for are reasonable given the demands of the workplace. “I do feel like bakery work is pretty romanticized, but it’s really long hours, really early hours and it’s a really physically demanding workplace,” they said. “I feel like the things that everybody wants to bargain for would be reasonable in any workplace.” Ultimately, the union would help workers negotiate on more equal terms, the employee said. “As one of my coworkers put it, the relationship between the workers and the boss is an inherently imbalanced relationship,” said the employee. “We just want to even that out when we get a seat at the bargaining table.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Francesca PicaFrancesca Pica is the editor-in-chief for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the city news editor. She has covered multiple municipal elections, state politics and is a leading reporter on Madison labor issues. She served as an intern for The Capital Times, currently serves as a WisPolitics intern and will also intern with the Wisconsin State Journal this summer. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Brooklyn Schwoerer, a sophomore at UW-Madison, and her Holstein cow Barracuda. Photo courtesy of Maddy Hensel/Dairy Agenda Today SCIENCE For the World Dairy Expo, cow health is key How dairy cattle nutrition and health impacts the lives of Wisconsin farmers and consumers. By Nicole Steele October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Brooklyn Schwoerer, a sophomore at the University of Wisconsin-Madison studying dairy science, lives on a 62-cow farm in Edgar, Wisconsin and is involved in all aspects of the dairy industry. Schoerer has been showing cows since she was three years old. This year, she got to show her black and white Holstein Barracuda at the annual World Dairy Expo in Madison. To celebrate dairy’s impact in Wisconsin, the World Dairy Expo brought all things dairy related to the Alliant Energy Center in a large four-day event from Oct. 1 to Oct. 4. With machinery, educational lectures and many exhibitioners showing their prized cows, the World Dairy Expo continues to showcase the large impact dairy brings to not just Wisconsin, but the world. Dairy farms are an integral part of Wisconsin’s economy, making a $46.5 billion economic impact each year and supporting over 100,000 jobs. With around 5,425 dairy herds, our state greatly depends on the cows as well as the farmers taking care of them. “Being able to interact and connect with all different kinds of people that share the same passion for dairy cattle as me is extremely rewarding,” Schwoerer said. Schwoerer’s family’s calves are fed milk until two months of age and then are given calf grain and hay to allow growth and stimulation of the rumen. When calves are eight months old, they will receive haylage or a total mixed ration. Once a heifer is pregnant, her diet is built to focus on the growth and development of her calf, Schwoerer said. Finally, when the cow freshens, it receives a high-protein diet to allow for the greatest amount of milk production. And show cows have unique nutritional needs, Schowerer said. “Show cattle are judged on their presence and appearance in the show ring. A judge looks for a dairy animal to be clean-cut, deep and, most importantly, dairy. [A] low-energy hay and a high-protein diet will ensure that the animal will keep off weight but will still continue to grow,” Schwoerer said. The process of showing a cow involves many months of preparation. In March, Schwoerer selected her show animals based on mobility, soundness of feet and legs and the style and blending of parts, such as the head into the shoulder and the back into the body. Once the animals are picked, a high-protein diet and pasture access is given to allow for exercise. Cow hair is also an important part of showing. Schwoerer rinses her animals with cold water at night and washes them every other day. Once a month, she shaves all the hair leaving the topline and belly, creating strong and healthy hair by showtime. “Before showing, cows need to be clear of any diseases. This includes no ringworm or warts,” Schwoerer said. “This year, lactating cows had to undergo an avian influenza test.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Fair attendees and exhibitors are at higher risk of infection from animal influenza viruses, but preventative measures such as avian flu testing for each animal and following preventative actions such as hand-washing and avoiding sick animals can prevent the spread. Cow health and nutrition are critical to showing prized cows, improving human diets The aspect of showing doesn’t just involve a beautiful cow getting judged in a ring. Cow health and nutrition play a large role in keeping these cows healthy and creating larger milk yields, according to Matt Akins, a dairy scientist and research leader for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Agricultural Research Service Dairy Forage Research Center in Marshfield, Wisconsin. “Nutrition can have great impacts on cow health, including ensuring adequate fiber, energy, protein, minerals and vitamins are provided in the diet to meet the cow’s needs for milk production and maintaining their bodies,” Akins told the Cardinal. Fiber maintains the health of a cow’s rumen by allowing for stimulation of cow chewing and saliva production, which helps avoid acidic rumen conditions, Akins said. Protein and essential amino acids that are important for a cow’s diet and immune function to help prevent pathogens. Vitamins and minerals, such as zinc for hoof health, selenium and vitamin E for immune function and choline for liver function play key roles in improving cow health. As with the important nutrients needed for a cow's overall health, their diet also plays a large role in maintaining health and high milk yield, Akins said. “50 to 70% of the cow’s diet is forage depending on the quality and nutritive value. Forages fed include alfalfa silage or hay, corn silage, grass silage or hay and other fibrous forages needed to ensure good rumen health,” Akins said. A cow’s diet not only affects the amount of milk they produce, but also the quality of their milk that humans consume. There is a direct relationship between nutrition quality and milk quality in cows, Akins said. “Cows that are grazed on pasture and consuming fresh forage have been found to have increased levels of carotenoids in the milk and changes in milk fat profiles,” Akins said. Carotenoids are naturally occurring plant pigments mammals only obtain through their diet. Some carotenoids have been found to increase vitamin A intake, have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties and improve ocular and cognitive health. Milk can drastically improve the vitamin A intake in human diets. Cows that receive a high quality forage diet have increased carotenoid levels in their milk, which therefore affects human consumption. In order for a cow to receive adequate nutrition, nutritionists play a large role on dairy farms. Akins told the Cardinal nutritionists help balance forages with supplemental feeds to meet nutrient requirements. They also keep up to date with new nutritional research and knowledge to help better a cow’s diet. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Despite its many influences, Insomniac Games' take on the web-slinger is an innovative new entry. Photo by Image courtesy of steamXO/Flickr | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘Spider-Man’ successfully brings Peter Parker to the PlayStation 4 By Marty Forbeck September 20, 2018 | 7:30am CDT Spider-Man feels like one of those series that’s never quite going to get it right — one that always passes the bar for greatness, swings effortlessly around the barrier for excellence, but stops short just a half inch of being 100 percent coherent. Don’t get me wrong: Games reaching even that point are few and far between, and Insomniac Games’ take on Peter Parker should be applauded from every rooftop in the country for everything it does well. Not a single release since 2004’s “Spider-Man 2” has figured out that playing as the hero should actually be fun. “Spider-Man 2” can be compared to an extreme sports game, where the movement combos and swinging mechanics are more interesting than the story missions. After starting up the newest “Spider-Man,” which released earlier this month, I decided to try the movement combos from “Spider-Man 2.” To my surprise, they worked just the same as the original — it was a dream come true that I wouldn’t trade for anything. “Spider-Man” has some issues carving out its own identity amongst the many depictions of Spider-Man’s character. One of the title’s primary collectibles are backpacks that fill in the backstory of this game’s Peter Parker, which makes it somewhat puzzling that most of them also seem to serve as cheeky references to other versions of Spider-Man. Within this distinct universe, the backpacks imply that chunks of the Sam Raimi movies, Stan Lee comics, modern Ultimate comics and even previous Spider-Man games have happened. It leads to a backstory that feels like patchwork and pandering to say the least. Insomniac is much better at innovating when they’re plotting the story itself. As much as the game’s side content wants to wallow in the past, its main storyline wants to look into the future. J. Jonah Jameson has left the Daily Bugle and now works as a crazed, Alex Jones-style podcaster. Peter and Aunt May are at a surprisingly sympathetic and realistic depiction of a homeless shelter. Mary Jane Watson is an independent and intrepid reporter. However, the story does have some problems — like nearly every other big-budget game with this level of polish, there is a level of pacing compromise. For example, almost the entire first half of the game is spent introducing the game’s two main villains. In the end, the more interesting of the two — who was invented explicitly for this game — is dropped in favor of a rehashed Doctor Octopus. With the exception of some quicktime events carried over from the other Spider-Man games, combat never fails to let down. With that in mind, there’s hardly a dull moment in fight sequences. The combat system reminds me of the classic Batman: Arkham mechanics, but it fits better here. Batman always felt a bit awkward jumping from enemy to enemy between punches, but Spider-Man is all about flowing, quick movement. Zipping between enemies who are dozens of yards away from one another every couple of seconds to keep a combo up feels very natural. The system may be Batman’s, but Spider-Man wears it best. "Zipping between enemies who are dozens of yards away from one another every couple of seconds to keep a combo up feels very natural." If anyone could accuse this game of stealing anything, it should be of stealing from “Spider-Man 2,” albeit stealing poorly. As janky as the combat and story were in “Spider-Man 2,” its web-swinging was handled deftly. You had to press one button to start swinging, another to control your speed while swinging, a third to release the swing and a fourth if you wanted to swing again. Now you just press one button to zip somewhere, another to boost, and you’re launched down a full city block. With a complex and modular system, getting anywhere in “Spider-Man 2” took skill — that’s why it made sense to have timed acrobatic challenges right from the start. I suspect that’s why similar challenges in the new game are not unlocked until much later. I fear this review is becoming scattered. I’ve accused the game of stealing too much, not stealing enough, not stealing well enough, wallowing in its past, not living up to its past, etc. I prefer to evaluate a game on its own merits, and Insomniac’s “Spider-Man” has more than enough to recommend it. It is a good game. Arguably it’s even great. It’s clever, it’s fun and it’s definitely one of the best games to play on PS4. Still, I can’t help but think it brings some of the comparisons on itself. Maybe there’s a lesson about artistic ambition in all of this. If your own universe sets itself up as the best example of everything anyone has ever liked about Spider-Man, then don’t be surprised when that universe falls a little flat. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Final Grade: A- Marty Forbeck is the Daily Cardinal's video games columnist. To read more of his work, click here. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Wisconsin Tuition Promise to cover the cost of low-income students at UW System campuses. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Cardinal View: UW-Madison expression policies shape debate on only their terms. This restricts student dialogue In wake of the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s new expressive policy and neutrality statement, The Daily Cardinal believes these sentiments disregard the Wisconsin Idea and could censor important student protests. By The Daily Cardinal Editorial Board October 29, 2024 | 11:29am CDT In the wake of student demonstrations last semester, officials at the University of Wisconsin-Madison have updated their policies regarding expressive speech on campus and public statements as an institution. While the university champions the free discussion of ideas in our campus community, the reality of these policies tells a different story — one that stands against the Wisconsin Idea. In August, the university released the updated policy, now called the Expressive Activity Policy, to clarify restrictions of protesting on campus while also reiterating current policies. This includes restricting expressive activity — which can include protests, speeches and chants — within 25 feet of all university building entrances, limitations on size for indoor signs, restrictions on certain sound amplifications and restricting activities in certain areas on campus, like the Abraham Lincoln Statue, during certain hours of the day. The policy also outlines how UWPD is able to extend the 25-foot distance further if safety is at risk. In concept, the new student demonstration guidelines are designed to safeguard students’ right to safely protest. In practice, the Expressive Activity Policy has the possibility to not only restrict student expression, but stand in direct opposition to the university’s mission of fostering the Wisconsin Idea “that education should influence people’s lives beyond the boundaries of the classroom.” The university’s new Expressive Activity Policy forces students to reconsider the consequences of fighting for change, potentially creating a chilling effect out of fear student protesters could violate unclear rules. As student demonstrators reconsider their involvement in expressive political action, the administration has placed an important asterisk on the Wisconsin Idea — education should influence people’s lives beyond the classroom, but only on their terms. “The robust exchange of ideas and viewpoints is central to a university,” said Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin in a UW-Madison statement following the policy release. “That means that we will often engage with ideas and perspectives that may be new to us, and that might, in some cases, cause us unease or discomfort.” At face value, this makes sense. But, the question still remains: what’s the difference between a “robust exchange of ideas” and student demonstrations now deemed to be unacceptable? Moreover, is meaningful change always possible when activism is limited to a roundtable discussion tucked away in a university building? Following the updates to the Expressive Activity Policy, the university released the Institutional and Public Positions Statements policy, outlining when and how university officials will consider and institute public statements. The new policy determines university response on whether or not the topic directly impacts the “core mission or operations of the university or one or more of its units.” Once again, the guidelines of this new policy are ambiguous. By leaving statements up to the discretion of the university, it also sets up zero expectation for the university to address current events that deeply affect the wellbeing of the student body. What could be considered an impact to a “core mission or operation of the university?” “When the institution takes a point of view on a matter of public concern or controversy, however well intended, it risks crowding out other points of view… it risks harm to one of the most core and fundamental dimensions of a university: free and open debate,” Mnookin wrote in an email to students and staff. UW-Madison withdrawing itself from making statements is not the best way to encourage free and open discussions on campus. Students and community members alike should have the opportunity to critique and challenge statements made by the university, because those challenges have the possibility to spark meaningful changes on the institutional level. When it comes to addressing current events, the role of the university isn’t to serve as the final arbiter of right and wrong for the student body, but that doesn’t mean the institution should always pursue neutrality, especially when determined by a standard that’s unclear to the student body. Ideally, the university should be one of many voices in the “robust exchange of ideas” taking place on campus. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The bottom line is, when the university takes a stance, they take a risk — but if meaningful campus discourse in pursuit of the Wisconsin Idea is the priority, it’s one worth taking. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Students vote at Nicholas Recreation Center on November 5, 2024. Photo by Cameron Schneider | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Key Wisconsin counties shifted right this election. Here’s the breakdown Vice President Kamala Harris underperformed in Wisconsin’s key Democratic strongholds but made gains in “WOW” counties in a tough loss against former President Donald Trump. By Anna Kleiber November 12, 2024 | 2:00am CST Despite a nationwide shift right, Wisconsin performed the same as it had in the last two presidential elections: within one percentage point. President-elect Donald Trump saw small gains by widening his edge in smaller counties and held his own in larger counties. Unlike the 2020 presidential election, Democrats were unable to replicate big shifts in the Madison and Milwaukee suburbs that had offset Trump’s rural gains, paving the way for President Joe Biden’s victory in Wisconsin. Wisconsin’s 10 electoral votes gave Trump the 270 he needed to secure the presidency over Vice President Kamala Harris. The Nov. 5 election marked the fifth time in the past seven presidential elections that Wisconsin was decided by less than a percentage point, and the seventh time in the past nine elections that the winning candidate for president received 50% of the vote in the state. Here’s a county-by-county look at how both candidates performed in Wisconsin in the 2024 presidential election. Harris underperformed in Wisconsin’s Democratic strongholds While Harris held a considerable margin over Trump in Dane and Milwaukee counties by 38.5%, she performed marginally worse than Biden in both by 1.1%. In Milwaukee County, Harris received 68.3% compared to Biden’s 69.4%, underperforming by roughly one percentage point, according to an independent data analysis from The Daily Cardinal. NBC News reported Dane County was one of the seven counties that could decide the election. In the Democratic stronghold, Trump received 23.4% to Harris’ 75.1%, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. Harris underperformed in the county by 0.4% compared to Biden’s 75.5% in 2020. On University of Wisconsin-Madison campus wards, Harris underperformed by seven points compared to Biden in 2020, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. The ‘WOW’ counties continue to shift left Milwaukee’s suburban communities, while historically Republican strongholds in statewide elections, have slowly trended toward Democrats in the 2016 and 2020 elections. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties — collectively referred to as Wisconsin’s “WOW” counties — are predominantly white and have voted for Republican candidates by margins upwards of 60% in every presidential election in the 21st century, according to state elections results archives. In the 2024 election, Trump won all three counties by a comfortable margin — 19.7%, 10.5% and 36.3% for Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties, respectively — although Harris performed marginally better than Biden, making headway in these historically red counties, according to an independent data analysis from The Daily Cardinal. Harris received 39.5%, 44.1% and 31.3% of the vote in Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington counties compared to Biden’s 38.9%, 43.3% and 30.3%. There are many factors that could play a role in the suburban shifts seen in the last three presidential elections, including Trump’s authoritarian impulses and controversial rhetoric on immigrants and the economy, that could contribute to the increased Democratic support in the “WOW” counties. The ‘BOW’ counties stay red despite the region trending less red in statewide elections Brown, Outagamie and Winnebago counties make up Wisconsin’s “BOW” counties, home to a growing population center in the Fox Valley that includes cities like Green Bay and Appleton. In recent statewide elections, the region has trended less red. The new 18th Senate District — made up of Appleton in Outagamie County and Menasha, Neenah and Oshkosh in Winnebago County — and the 53rd Assembly District — made up of Neenah, Menasha and part of Appleton — were top targets in the Democrats’ battle for more seats in the state Legislature. While Democrats were unsuccessful in flipping the 53rd Assembly District seat, Democrats comfortably won the 18th Senate District with Democratic candidate Kristin Alfheim taking 53.3% of the vote to Republican candidate Anthony Phillips’ 46.7%. The district was one of five seats Democrats picked up, causing Senate Republicans to lose their supermajority. Trump performed marginally better in all three counties, earning 53.1%, 54.4% and 51.7% in Brown, Outagamie and Winnebago counties compared to 2020’s 52.8%, 54.1% and 51%. Harris, on the other hand, performed similarly to Biden in the counties, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. While both Trump and Republican gubernatorial candidate Tim Michels performed well in the Outagamie County, the county notably swung in favor of liberal-leaning Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Janet Protasiewicz in the spring 2023 election with 51.5% of the county’s vote going to her over conservative former Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Dan Kelly. Three of four battleground counties swing right Sauk, Door, Vernon and Columbia are Wisconsin’s battleground counties, often swinging from election to election. In 2020, the counties went 50-50 — Sauk and Door for Biden and Vernon and Columbia for Trump. In the 2024 election, Trump took three of the four battleground counties in Wisconsin — Sauk, Vernon and Columbia. Harris led Door County, a bellwether county that had accurately predicted the outcome of the last six presidential elections, by 2.3% with 99% of precincts reporting despite Trump ultimately winning the 2024 presidential election. In addition to not accurately predicting the outcome of the election, Harris outperformed Biden by 1.4% in the county, according to the Cardinal’s independent data analysis. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
courtesy of 4 proof film ARTS ‘Do Not Expect Too Much From the End of the World’ is a bold, brash film about the modern world The Romanian film is a provocative look on modern living. By Joseph Panzer April 19, 2024 | 2:00am CDT “Do Not Expect Too Much From the End of the World” is a shamelessly modern and irreverent film, blending cinema history with politics in a way that is refreshing and captivating, reminding us of what movies can do. The film is about a hectic day in the life of Angela, a young production assistant in Bucharest, as she drives around to interview those injured in workplace accidents for a workplace safety advertisement. The first thing that’s apparent about the film is its intense cultural critique with a deep knowledge of cinema history. The film introduces the title of its first part on a notecard in a not-so-subtle nod to the music video for Bob Dylan’s “Subterranean Homesick Blues.” This sets the stage for the metatextual style director Radu Jude employs to comment on the contemporary Western world by extensively referencing other films and cinema history. Like Dylan, Jude uses references to previous works to create his own artistic themes regarding the absurdities of the current political moment defined by wars, the rise of far-right ideology and increasing corporatism. The film heavily draws footage from the 1981 Romanian film “Angela Goes On,” incorporating characters from that film and splicing in scenes to convey that despite the collapse of communism and all of the social change of the past 40 years, neither Romania’s working conditions nor culture have significantly changed. The black-and-white cinematography and the conversations regarding current political developments like the Russia-Ukrainian War and the death of Elizabeth II call to mind the 1960s work of Jean-Luc Godard, a filmmaker explicitly mentioned in Jude’s film. This can be seen as Jude drawing a parallel between himself and Godard in their examination of how cinema responds to and influences the world. It’s a lot to chew on, but “Do Not Expect Too Much From the End of the World” is a film that takes a humorously unabashed look at the confusion of a post-COVID world defined by late-stage capitalism. Playing with more modern media formats, many of the film’s color sequences during Part A come from the use of Instagram and TikTok videos, where Angela uses filters to adopt a sex-obsessed, misogynistic alter ego as a parody of influencers like Andrew Tate. This serves as an ingenious commentary on the mind numbing content being pushed through algorithms while also engaging with digital media. The best part of the film is its humor. The entire picture is saturated with gallows humor that delightfully pokes fun at everything from the gig economy to the American epidemic of mass shootings, causing the auditorium at the April 7 Wisconsin Film Festival screening to constantly erupt in laughter. This is a film that knows exactly what it wants to say and knows how to say it in a way that is never intrusive but fresh and exciting with each new punchline. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S SOCCER Badgers’ 25th NCAA tournament appearance ends with third round defeat Wisconsin women’s soccer season comes to an end after falling 3-1 to No.1 seed USC in the NCAA tournament Sweet 16. By Gabriella Hartlaub December 3, 2024 | 12:53pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers women’s soccer team’s trip to the NCAA tournament ended on Sunday, Nov. 24 with a 3-1 loss to No. 1 seed University of Southern California in the third round. Sunday's game marked the Badgers’ first appearance in the Sweet 16 since 2021, but even a late goal from graduate student midfielder Dara Adringa couldn’t help them overcome a three-goal deficit to USC. Wisconsin’s first sign of trouble came in the last five minutes of the first half, where the Trojans were given a penalty kick that led to a goal. Fouls proved to be an issue for the Badgers as they wracked up 15 throughout the game. In the first half, Wisconsin out-fouled USC 8-1 and had zero shots on goal. This was a familiar feeling for the team, who went with no shots on goal in the first half of their matchup against No. 4 University of Virginia in the second round of the tournament. If the Badgers keptUSC out of the goalbox, they could’ve pulled off a similar victory to the one against Virginia in a penalty shootout. But once the second half started, USC’s intense offense and scoring, something that they’ve come to be known for, pressed down on the Badgers in full force. The Trojans’ second goal came in the 58th minute with the third coming less than five minutes later. That, coupled with the penalty kick goal from the first half, proved insurmountable for a Badgers team that had three shots on goal the entire game. Wisconsin's season ends with a 10-6-5 overall record and a 5-1-3 record in the Big Ten. In tournament play, Ohio State knocked the Badgers out of the Big Ten Tournament 0-1 and USC defeated them in the Sweet 16. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
The medical area of the western side of the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus is pictured in an aerial view during autumn on Oct. 12, 2013. In the center is the UW Hospitals and Clinics. Clusters around the periphery, counter clockwise from far left, prominent campus facilities include the Waisman Center, American Family Children's Hospital, UW Medical Foundation Centennial Building, Veterans Administration Hospital, Signe Skott Cooper Hall, Renebohm Hall, Health Sciences Learning Center and Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research (WIMR). On the horizon, from left to right, is Lake Mendota, the downtown Madison skyline, Wisconsin State Capitol, and Lake Monona. The photograph was made from a helicopter looking northeast. (Photo by Jeff Miller/UW-Madison) Photo by Jeff Miller | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison climbs research ranking to sixth in 2024 The University of Wisconsin-Madison spent more than $1.7 billion in research expenditures for the first time, ranking sixth in research spending after years sitting at eighth place. By Ted Hyngstrom December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin–Madison rose to sixth in research expenditure rankings published by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Nov. 25 after years of sitting at eighth place. UW–Madison surpassed $1.7 billion in research expenditures in 2023, its highest amount ever, according to the NSF Higher Education Research and Development survey. The NSF HERD is an annual census of U.S. colleges and universities that spent at least $150,000 in separately accounted for research and development in the fiscal year. The new ranking shows a two-spot increase over last year, along with an increase of over $208 million from July 2022-23. This is a 13.7% increase in research expenditures. Some of the largest expenditures included $29 million to study and treat diseases that cause blindness, $15 million over the next three years to increase artificial intelligence research and education and a $22.3 million award for the Population Health Institute in the UW School of Medicine and Public Health to expand work on community health, according to a UW-Madison statement. “UW-Madison has been a research powerhouse for generations,” UW–Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin said in the statement. “This latest increase in both our research expenditures and our HERD ranking is further evidence of our deep commitment to bringing incredible UW–Madison expertise across disciplines to the grand challenges of our time and to translating our discoveries to improve lives at home in Wisconsin and beyond.” The ranking increase marks a rise over the past decade. UW–Madison was ranked fourth in the nation for research spending in 2014 but had fallen to eighth by 2018, according to PBS Wisconsin. At the time, former UW–Madison Chancellor Rebecca Blank credited this fall to state funding cuts to the UW System. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Bailey Krause | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Campus early voting rooms change due to long lines, statewide software error The Madison Clerk’s Office moved early voting at Memorial Union to a larger room because of long wait times and an issue with printing ballot envelopes. By Mary Bosch and Noe Goldhaber October 25, 2024 | 9:05pm CDT The Madison Clerk's Office and the University of Wisconsin-Madison moved early in-person voting to a larger room at Memorial Union after an error in statewide software and high early voter turnout caused lines as long as two hours. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal the Memorial Union voting room moved from a smaller room near the Rathskeller to Tripp Commons on Friday and will move to the Main Lounge during early voting next week. Union South’s voting location temporarily moved to near the art galleries because of homecoming celebrations Friday and will return to the second floor near the theater, Govindarajan said. Because of “higher than expected turnout,” the WisVote server used by clerks across the state lagged and caused an error with printing labels that go on ballot envelopes, according to the Wisconsin Elections Commission. “Normally it takes two seconds to print out these labels that are needed for the ballots for accuracy, and it's just taking a lot longer than that,” Madison Communications Manager Dylan Brogan said. “That's really the primary driver [of long wait times].” Now, state-level clerks are restarting the system every few hours, and it’s running faster, WEC Chair Ann Jacobs said in a statement on Twitter. “Wisconsin is updating us and doing everything they can to alleviate the problem,” Brogan said. “We wish it wasn't happening either.” Govindarajan said he anticipated wait times to be shorter because of the room change at Memorial Union. “I think for future elections, Tripp Commons should be the default area. Voting shouldn't be relegated to the area by the market — the closet. I don't really know what to call that area, but you can substitute closet for whatever it's called,” Govindarajan said. 4,776 in-person absentee ballots were cast Friday across Madison, which Brogan said is the highest number at this point in the election cycle and almost double what is expected at this point in the election. The WEC reported a statewide 40% increase for in-person absentee voting compared to the same period in 2020. Poll workers have been working late hours into the night to register ballots as the system is more efficient at that time, Brogan said. They are working to update records as quickly as possible so voters can ensure their vote was cast. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Despite the delays, record-high early voting reflects students' eagerness to have their voices heard at the ballot box, Govindarajan said. “We were asking if people [on Library Mall] have a plan to vote, and a lot of people are saying they've already voted, they're going to vote right now, or they'll be voting on Election Day,” Govindarajan said. “There's not many people saying they don't have a plan to vote.” Early in-person absentee voting started on Tuesday and will continue until the Sunday before Election Day. Madison residents can vote at any voting location across the city, including Memorial Union, Union South, many Madison libraries or community centers. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 Noe GoldhaberNoe Goldhaber is the college news editor and former copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She is a Statistics and Journalism major and has specialized on a wide range of campus topics including protests, campus labor, student housing, free speech and campus administration. She has done data analysis and visualization for the Cardinal on a number of stories. Follow her on Twitter at @noegoldhaber. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Shar-Ron Buie, the associate director of JustDane, calls for government regulation to address extreme heat in Wisconsin prisons at a press conference on Nov. 20, 2024. Photo by Audrey Lopez-Stane | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS ‘The walls sweat’: Extreme heat in Wisconsin prison systems prompts calls for major regulation A press conference held by University of Wisconsin-Madison Capstone students called for significant change to fix severe heating issues in Wisconsin prisons. By Audrey Lopez-Stane November 23, 2024 | 10:25am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison students and advocates called for government regulation to address extreme heat in all corrections facilities across the state at a press conference Wednesday. UW-Madison Capstone students held the press conference to bring attention to the growing crisis of heat vulnerability in Wisconsin prisons. In Wisconsin, prison temperatures can reach as high as 97 degrees Fahrenheit in the summer. Temperatures above 80 degrees Fahrenheit can show a 20% increase in violent interactions in prison. “The walls sweat, and the paint peels,” James Morgan, lead organizer for criminal justice reform advocacy group MOSES, said at Wednesday’s press conference. He added that the conditions inside the state’s prisons “cause mental, physical and emotional harm,” and stressed that prisoners are human beings, not just “violent criminals.” Shar-Ron Buie, associate director of JustDane, a nonprofit organization that advocates for previously incarcerated people, said the unreasonably high temperatures in Wisconsin prisons “transcends mere discomfort.” Buie voiced that correct temperatures in prison are not a luxury but necessities for basic survival. The environment becomes more violent and illnesses become more prevalent under high temperatures, which correlates with higher rates of heat-related deaths. Wisconsin prisoners, however, do not get a choice in their climate. “Temperatures are controlled from a centralized location, often arbitrarily and capriciously decided on by the officer,” Buie said at Wednesday’s press conference. Even when prisoners attempt to block air vents, Buie said there is little escape from the unbearable heat. WISDOM Transformational Justice Campaign Coordinator Mark Rice touched on his own experience in the Wisconsin prison system and said “forcing people to live in extreme heat is a form of torture.” James Wilborn, a close colleague of Rice, died in the Milwaukee Secure Detention Facility in 2015. While Rice and other activists said that heat exhaustion contributed to Wilborn’s death, the Wisconsin Department of Corrections (DOC) Communications Director Beth Hardtke told The Daily Cardinal in a statement Nov. 21 there were zero heat-related deaths in Wisconsin DOC facilities since 2013. The DOC declined to comment on Wilborn’s individual cause of death. Rice attributed prisoner maltreatment to aggressive rhetoric and monetary reasons. The dehumanizing narrative about prisoners results in government and taxpayer opposition for further prison funding. But this does not diminish the need for safe prison environments, he said. Although Hardtke said the DOC is planning air tempering projects for multiple Wisconsin facilities, she acknowledged that most DOC buildings are still not universally air conditioned. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Dane County leaders call for Hmong translators, building funds at public hearing Citizens and nonprofit leaders voiced concern over the Dane County budget at a public hearing Oct. 9, calling for increased funding for translators and facilities. By Maria Knaack October 17, 2024 | 5:00am CDT The Dane County Board of Supervisors held a public hearing Oct. 9 for community members to voice budget requests to the County Board of Supervisors. Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn proposed the new 2025 budget in September, featuring significant cuts from last year’s budget. The proposed budget, totaling $903 million, cuts nearly 7% from 2024, partially in response to the end of pandemic-era federal aid from the American Rescue Plan. During the hearing, members of the public, primarily nonprofit leaders and union members, expressed concern over reduced funding. Many attendees spoke in favor of setting aside funds to hire a Hmong translator at the county level in order to help Hmong speakers access and utilize government programs and assistance. Six members of the Southeast Asian Healing Center (SEAHC), ranging from college students and employees of the center to the elders in need of this assistance, explained how vital services are currently inaccessible to those who do not speak English. “Language barrier is one of our main concerns. . . this role would serve as a vital bridge between Hmong speakers and the local government by ensuring our community is served properly and gets the services that are so needed,” said Doua Vang, executive director of SEAHC. In addition to SEAHC, other leaders of nonprofits expressed concerns over a possible lack of funding. Anne Maestrick, the executive director of Sunshine Place, described her organization as a “resource hub for those facing hardship” that has been recognized as a model agency working towards ending homelessness. Maestrick asked the board to provide $2 million in the budget for Sunshine Place to replace one of their buildings, which, in addition to improving the condition of facilities, would give them more space to add new services, including mental health services. Sun Prairie Food Pantry President Mark Thompson also voiced support for Sunshine Place and briefly advocated for support of the Sun Prairie Food Pantry, but without specific metrics. Members of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees union (AFSCME) also offered a few amendments to the budget that revolved around valuable county locations, including the Dane County Airport, Henry Vilas Zoo and the Alliant Energy Center. AFSCME members discussed adding new employees to these locations, such as janitorial staff, mechanics and events coordinators. They explained these positions could be budget neutral by replacing current positions which are unnecessary or are ending after this year, and they would replace outsourcing that is currently needed. The Board of Supervisors will continue to review and finalize the budget, considering these requests. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “The budget is determined based on the needs of the communities it serves. It is important that members of the community are given the opportunity to contribute at every step of the process,” Chair Patrick Miles stated in an Oct. 1 press release. The finalized budget is scheduled to be released in late October. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Trump’s proposal to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education would impact Wisconsin students Wisconsin students would face the brunt of the impact if the U.S. Department of Education was abolished, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. By Olivia Ruetten December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST While Republican President-elect Donald Trump has promised to overhaul many parts of the U.S. government, he’s said he wants to eliminate one entirely: the U.S. Department of Education (DOE). Trump vowed to shut down the DOE, echoing calls from the conservative Heritage Foundation’s Project 2025 to terminate the agency, which it calls a “convenient one-stop shop for the woke education cartel.” Throughout his campaign, Trump distanced himself from Project 2025 and has claimed that he had no idea who wrote it — however, recent cabinet picks may suggest otherwise. The DOE has been a point of contention among politicians on both sides of the aisle since its creation in 1979. The conservative push to abolish the DOE comes from the Republican Party’s long-standing belief in smaller-scale government intervention into daily life. Republicans believe that education, like other mainstream issues like abortion and voting rights, should be up to states to decide. In Wisconsin, Republican lawmakers have championed school choice, and have called for education policy to return to state and local governments. On the campaign trail, both Trump and U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde voiced their support for the elimination of the DOE and the localization of public schools. At a campaign visit to Milwaukee in October, Trump singled out the city as the “home of the first and oldest school choice” program and declared education is “the civil rights issue of our age,” according to the New York Post. Roughly 63% of Wisconsin Republicans said they were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with Wisconsin’s public schools, according to an August 2024 Marquette Law School poll. Republicans champion school choice, advocate for the localization of schools Republicans have strongly advocated for school choice, which they define as the right for parents to choose where their child goes to school, public or private, and what their school teaches them. Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson spoke in favor of school choice and advocated for education policy to be handled at a local level during a Moms for Liberty event held at the Republican National Convention in July. “I’m hoping that one result from Moms for Liberty is we start moving away from these massive, large schools, and we start moving more toward the old one-room school,” Johnson said at the event. Former Wisconsin governor Tommy Thompson supported Wisconsin’s first school choice movement of the 1990s, which saw Milwaukee’s private school population increase from 341 students in 1990 to 29,000 students in 2021, according to School Choice Wisconsin, Many conservative families fear public educational institutions are “woke,” meaning schools prioritize teaching children about social injustice and traditionally liberal values over actual educational material. This pushes families toward private or Christian schools that are privately run and funded. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin offers options for parents who do not want to send their child to public school. Private schools service 13.5% of Wisconsin students, while homeschooling options service 2.96%, according to Johns Hopkins School of Education. Additionally, Wisconsin’s private school voucher program services 43% of privately educated students, and this number is expected to grow by 60% once the voucher program’s enrollment cap sunsets in 2026. Trump’s current pick for Secretary of Education is Linda McMahon, wife of former WWE chairman Vince McMahon. She has advocated for school choice and said she will be a “fierce advocate for Parents.” The National Education Association has disavowed McMahon, saying she “has an agenda to privatize public education — much like Betsy DeVos before her.” What is the state’s role in education, and what does the DOE actually do? Wisconsin schools allocate state and local taxes to state and local schools, which are run by a board of elected or appointed officials who decide what is taught within the school district. What information is disseminated in schools is also not typically decided by the federal government. Gov. Tony Evers recently signed a partial veto boosting school funding for the next 400 years. Evers provided the state of Wisconsin with 400 years of ongoing, predictable funding increases which aim to better fund Wisconsin’s public schools. State superintendent Jill Underly hopes to use the extra funding to boost mental health, school nutrition and special education resources. One of the DOE’s responsibilities is distributing federal aid for K-12 schools and key federal student loans and aid for college and university students. For example, the DOE provided $190 billion to schools for emergency relief during the pandemic. Financial aid programs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison benefit 58% of first-year students, and the average financial aid package for first-year students is over $12,000. Without the DOE, the responsibility of financial aid distribution would go to another federal department. Project 2025 suggests sending this responsibility to the Department of Treasury, though officials said moving the Office of Federal Student Aid out of the DOE would create chaos worse than the rollout of the 2024-2025 FAFSA form last fall. Additionally, the DOE regulates programs created under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act that ensure children with disabilities and students ages 3 to 21 from low-income families have equitable access to educational resources. In Wisconsin, 14.1% of students have an Individualized Education Plan, 3% of students have a specific learning disability and 1.1% of students have a 504 plan. Without the DOE, these programs may lose regulation and disabled students’ rights to an equitable education may be violated, according to nonprofit education reporting organization Chalkbeat. People suggesting public schools are “woke” take issue with the DOE’s Office for Civil Rights, which addresses allegations of race, gender and sexuality-based discrimination. It also handles investigations of sexual assault. But guidelines introduced during President Barack Obama’s administration to enhance the handling of assault cases were rolled back by the Trump administration following criticism that the policies were “too harsh.” Political experts said it’s unlikely Trump will follow through on his claims that he would close the DOE. The DOE could be divided and given to other government agencies to take care of, and Title I, the federal government’s main funding stream for K-12 schools, would be given to the states. States would be allowed to use this funding in different ways as they see fit, leading to an uneven distribution of educational material across the country, according to US News. The process to eliminate the agency would take roughly 10 years, according to the New York Times. The resulting extreme funding cuts for public education would be unpopular, with Congress likely to vote against it. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Courtesy of Sarah Best/Flickr SCIENCE Epic Systems holds Cap Times Idea Fest panel about future health care research Innovation from Crisis: What COVID-19 taught us about medical research By John Ernst September 23, 2024 | 11:16am CDT Epic Systems, a health care software company based in Verona, Wisconsin, held a virtual panel Sept. 17 to discuss their development of Cosmos, an online dataset, as well as their future research. The panel was part of The Capital Times Idea Fest, an annual weekly event hosted by the Madison newspaper since 2017 featuring seminars and interviews with politicians, journalists and other experts. Epic’s Vice President of Clinical Informatics Jackie Gerhart and Epic Research Lead Caleb Cox led the panel. Epic primarily focuses on health care software development and got their start with Electronic Health Records (EHRs). They now provide software for many major hospitals in the United States and around the world. MyChart, the Epic creation used by hundreds of millions of practitioners and patients to centralize medical records and data online, is one of the company’s most popular and widespread online offerings. Through the development of much of the software made to ease the health care process and surround the patient with information, Epic sought to use the data to help inform other patients through Cosmos and Epic Research, Gerhart said. Cosmos is an online dataset which Epic EHR customers can opt into to contribute de-identifying data allowing Epic to provide specialized care to one patient with a similar diagnosis to another patient in the dataset. Gerhart asserted that Cosmos would allow clinicians to solve “medical mysteries” and provide the best care for patients quickly by using the Cosmos data. Best Care Choices and Look-Alikes are two pieces of software Epic has developed through Cosmos to allow physicians to make decisions based on similar experiences and connect to other physicians in the Cosmos community about rare conditions. Epic Research builds off of Cosmos, using the data to publish studies on a variety of health studies that may not have been publicly available. “Quick, representative and available were the keys,” Gerhart said during the panel about the development of Epic Research. Once COVID-19 broke, Epic Research took its shape in response. One of the first studies Gerhart detailed during COVID-19 was the usage of ventilators. The company took clinical data, including how long patients were on ventilators and the severity of their illness, to figure out how to properly locate the limited amounts of ventilators. Epic researchers were able to discover that people could achieve lower oxygen saturations without needing to be on a ventilator and that they could use alternative care methods — thus, using the ventilators in a more intelligent way, according to Gerhart. The study triggered more research into COVID-19 but also into using the data to research a broad range of health issues. Cox described partnerships with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and being able to use their combined data to answer questions about Mpox and even strep throat, publishing the information in a matter of weeks. Throughout the panel, Gerhart and Cox delved into other studies Epic has done, including many of today’s pressing health issues such as fentanyl overdoses, the efficacy of telehealth visits and GLP-1s such as Ozempic. They said they aim to make this information and data easily available and understandable for everyday patients. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Isabella Barajas | The Daily Cardinal News ‘Pokémon go to the polls’ At an infamous 2016 rally, then-presidential nominee Hillary Clinton made a historic call to action. Over eight years later, we’re still seeing the effects. By Isabella Barajas October 25, 2024 | 12:00am CDT All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. CELADON CITY, Kanto — As the November election in Kanto grows closer, presidential candidates Ash Ketchum and Misty Williams are focusing their campaign strategies on one important demographic: Pokémon. After a rousing speech from then-presidential nominee Hillary Clinton, declaring Pokémon have the right to vote, the creatures have been coming out to vote in record numbers and are expected to play the most important role in determining the outcome of the upcoming presidential election in the Kanto region this November. Region-wide polls show the race is still tight in this demographic. As of Oct. 23, Misty is leading by a tight margin, with 49.3% of Pok​​émon pledging their support, while 45.9% support Ketchum, according to the Kanto Research Center. The Daily Cardinal, ever-dedicated to finding the best news for their seven loyal readers, interviewed several Pokémon students on the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s campus yesterday to hear their opinions on the upcoming election. Bulbasaur, a sophomore majoring in botany shared his support for Misty, explaining that her experience as a Gym Leader better prepared her for the position. While Ketchum was briefly a Pokémon Champion, Bulbasaur claimed this made him nothing more than an “over-hyped celebrity.” Unlike Bulbasaur, Charizard, a senior studying pyrotechnics is planning on voting for Ketchum, mentioning the controversy surrounding Misty’s race to the Cardinal, something Ketchum has focused on heavily in his campaign. “One day, I hear she’s from Johto or something, the next she’s from Kanto,” Charizard said. “She’s also a ginger, so I really don’t know what to believe at this point.” Nidoqueen, a senior majoring in gender and women’s studies, rejected these claims as “ridiculous” and cited the Jan. 6 incident as “proof” that Ketchum should never be elected. This is, of course, in reference to the attack on the Celadon City Pokémon Center by over 2,000 Team Rocket members that occurred on Jan. 6, 2021. Ketchum is currently facing several charges for his possible involvement with this attack. The day before the attacks, Ketchum released a public statement on “P,” formerly known as Pidgey, which many believe was inciting the attack. His statement read, “Team Rocket, let’s fight like hell!” Ketchum denies any malicious intent. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Another Ketchum supporter, Gengar, a junior studying toxicology, shared his concerns for a Misty presidency in terms of immigration policy. “When she was a Gym Leader, she was letting all these Alolan Pokémon into the region, now look at what’s happening,” Gengar said. “There’s all these Alolan Pokémon in the cities, and they’re eating the poor Meowths and Growlithes in Celadon City!” There are currently no verified reports of Alolan Pokémon eating Meowths and Growlithes, according to Officer Jenny of the Celadon City Police Department. Gengar was referencing a false claim popularized by Ketchum’s running mate, Pikachu. In response to the Cardinal’s request for comment, a spokesperson for Pikachu said, “Pika pika, Pikachu!” Clearly, the Ketchum campaign is doubling down. With high tensions and even higher stakes, it is more important than ever for Pokémon voters to remember the words of their famous civil rights leader, Hillary Clinton. “Pokémon, go to the polls!” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Phil Longo fired: What’s next for Wisconsin football? A breakdown of where the Badgers go from here after firing their offensive coordinator. By Josh Murphy November 23, 2024 | 4:56pm CST A day after Wisconsin suffered a 16-13 home loss against No. 1 Oregon on Nov. 16., head coach Luke Fickell relieved offensive coordinator Phil Longo of his duties. Fickell thanked Longo for his time with the team during his weekly press conference on Monday. Wisconsin’s offense has struggled all season, especially in the second half of games. The Nov. 16 loss to Oregon was their third of the season against a ranked opponent where the Badgers led at halftime. One of the main issues fans had with Longo’s offense was his predictable playcalling, which is why Wisconsin’s offense had been so stagnant in the second half of games. Longo’s situational play calling has also been questionable at times, particularly on fourth-and-short situations. All too often the Badgers handed the ball off to running back Tawee Walker in the shotgun formation on fourth-and-1, which has received heavy criticism from former players and fans. When reporters asked who would replace Longo as the offensive play-caller going forward during Monday’s press conference, Fickell responded briefly. “Why does it matter?” he said. Fickell elaborated by saying he does not think having a single play-caller is that important, even going so far as to call it overrated at times. Instead, Wisconsin’s offense will be run by a “collaborative group” going forward. This is interesting for a number of reasons. First, many fans and analysts would argue that having an offensive play-caller is important, especially for a Badgers team that has struggled on that side of the football all season long. It is also very unconventional for a Division I offense to be run by a committee rather than a single play-caller. Fickell did not specify who this committee would consist of and how large this committee is, so it seems as though we will learn more about how this offense will be run when we see it in action on the field. The Badgers sit at 5-5 with two games left on the schedule, and they need to win just one of them to keep their bowl streak of 22 years alive. They play on the road against Nebraska this Saturday before closing out the 2024 regular season in Madison against Minnesota in the annual “Battle for Paul Bunyan’s Axe” game. These will be two tough games, and the Badgers will have to leave it all on the field to beat their rivals and clinch a bowl game. After the season ends, Wisconsin will inevitably have to find a replacement offensive coordinator. There have been a few names linked to the Badgers already, including Notre Dame offensive coordinator Mike Denbrock and Notre Dame quarterbacks coach Gino Guidugli. Both of them served on Fickell’s staff with the Cincinnati Bearcats from 2017 to 2021 and may be able to help better execute Fickell’s vision for the “Air Raid” offense at Wisconsin. These last two games will be important for Fickell and the Badgers. Fans will be outraged if Wisconsin suffers back-to-back defeats and loses their bowl streak, and Fickell could easily find himself on the hot seat for the 2025 season. Fickell’s offensive play calling committee will get its first test against a Nebraska defense that has been giving up 321.4 yards per game and 20.0 points per game this season. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Kickoff is at 2:30 p.m. on Saturday at Memorial Stadium in Lincoln, Nebraska. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Mayor’s office moves to remove, replace Ald. Charles Myadze from committee assignments The Mayor’s office recommended the Common Council vote to remove and replace District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze from committee assignments following a sexual harassment investigation and a move to censure. By Marin Rosen December 4, 2024 | 12:58pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway recommended on Wednesday that District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze be removed and replaced on Common Council committees, according to the City of Madison Legislative Information Center. A sexual harassment investigation found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze broke state law despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them, including District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan introduced a resolution Nov. 20 to censure Myadze with the support of Rhodes-Conway and 14 members of the Common Council. “A majority of council members have sponsored a resolution to censure Myadze for his actions which are unbecoming of an alder,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal Wednesday. “Sexual harassment and workplace initimidation is wrong and cannot be tolerated.” Myadze currently resides on five committees, including the Alcohol License Review Committee, Board of Park Commissioners, Greater Madison Metropolitan Planning Organization, Sister City Collaboration Committee and Water Utility Board. “Everyone deserves to work in an environment free from harassment and abuse,” Govindarajan said. “Removing Ald. Myadze from his committee assignments is necessary to maintain trust in our city’s leadership and hold electeds accountable for their actions.” The replacement will be voted on Dec. 10 and has to be approved by a Common Council majority of 11 votes. Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
UW student and singer-songwriter Christa Lee performs at Memorial Union on October 4, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by David Saddler | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Indie music meets UW-Madison spirit in Christa Lee Senior Christa Klais, better known as singer-songwriter Christa Lee, spoke with The Daily Cardinal about balancing school and music. By Madeline Wooten October 30, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Working toward dreams and passions while in college may be a challenge to some, but University of Wisconsin-Madison senior Christa Klais learned how to balance her school and music career gracefully. While pursuing her bachelor’s degree, Klais has found success writing and performing music under the name Christa Lee. Since the age of two, Klais knew exactly who she wanted to be when she grew up — a singer. “I grew up loving [music]. My mother was a singer, so I always loved it and had a passion for it,” Klais said. “It always felt like my soul lived in music.” She auditioned for every opportunity she could get to sing in school and was raised with an “adoration” of music and artists from the 1980s. Amy Winehouse, Prince, Raye, Remi Wolf and Harry Styles inspired Klais. As her sound changed, so have her influences. Now, Klais admires Chappell Roan, Kali Uchis, Doja Cat, Faye Webster, SZA and Clairo. Klais reflected on her live performances this year as she performed her songs at the Memorial Union concert series on Oct. 4 with music artist Rosie Tucker. “It felt so good and natural. I had just been waiting to do it for such a long time,” Klais said about performing in front of a live audience. “It felt like my soul had a release of some sort because this is what I’ve been dreaming of my whole life.” Klais recently performed alongside UW-Madison a capella group Under A-Rest for a “Artists for Abortion Access” event series Oct. 24. Maintaining a work-life balance as a college student is no easy feat, and sometimes school makes Klais’ music take a pause to put school first. But outside of midterms and exams, Klais finds time to focus more on her music and creating sound. “It can be hard to be in a space where academics and sports are taken so seriously but the arts feel overlooked,” she said. “For me, it can definitely feel like I’m behind on both at all times, but in reality, I’m doing it, and it’s something I’m proud of.” Klais has big things coming as she continues working on unreleased songs, hoping to eventually release an album to take her audience “on a journey of an extended piece and tell a story,” she said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Despite possible judgment from peers, Klais continues to follow her dreams. She’s trying to make her mark as a musician even “in an environment where it is hard to feel like art is appreciated and worthy of taking up space.” she said. “It’s in those moments that I really choose myself and my dreams and make my innermost self proud and excited for more,” she said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
The novel is a beautiful work of art that contains a passionate message and cold reality. Photo by Image courtesy of Amazon | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Cardinal Picks: ‘Homegoing’ is an unbroken line to the past By Lauren Souza November 15, 2018 | 3:52pm CST This month's “Cardinal Pick” drew inspiration from one of my English classes. My goal for this column was to spend attention solely on women of color, because I wanted to create a space where the voices of these writers could be heard. Unfortunately, I did not have the opportunity to venture to the shelf in my room that contains endless books. But, a serendipitous moment occurred in my African American Literature class, where I had the privilege to read “Homegoing” by Yaa Gyasi. Gyasi’s debut novel delves into the lingering effects of slavery and West Africa’s role in the transatlantic slave trade. Tracing the descendants of one woman across seven generations, it contemplates the consequences of slavery on both sides of the Atlantic. "Yaa Gyasi is a Ghanaian-American novelist that helped diversify the canon of American literature." The highly acclaimed historical fiction book was published in 2016, receiving the National Book Critics Circle’s John Leonard Award for best first book. Yaa Gyasi is a Ghanaian-American novelist that helped diversify the canon of American literature. Prompted by a friend to visit the Cape Coast Castle, Gyasi found her inspiration between the luxurious upper levels — for colonists and local families — and the dungeons below where the slaves were contained. She stated, “I just found it really interesting to think about how there were people walking around upstairs who were unaware of what was to become of the people living downstairs.” Born in Ghana yet raised in Alabama, the unique personal experiences of Gyasi’s life enabled her to comprehend the legacy of slavery. In an interview, she related, “You know, coming from a country, Ghana, that had a role in slavery, and then ending up in a place where slavery is still so strongly felt institutionally, as racism is still so strongly felt. The irony of that wasn’t lost on me.” “Homegoing” follows the tale of Effia and Esi, two half-sisters unknown to each other who are born into the Fante and Asante tribes of 18th-century Ghana. Despite different villages and ethnic groups, they have the same mother, Maame. Each subsequent chapter alternates between their families’ lineage. Effia’s descendants remain in Africa while Esi is enslaved by an American planter. "The novel’s title originates from an old African-American tradition marking the going home of a deceased person, which allows the enslaved soul to return to Africa." The novel’s title originates from an old African-American tradition marking the going home of a deceased person, which allows the enslaved soul to return to Africa. The opposing lives of the African and African-American lineage shapes the arc where it is Gyasi who accomplishes her own homegoing. This novel is rooted in original sin from a curse that creates vast repercussions for the Asante woman’s descendants. One character discloses, “Evil begets evil. It grows. It transmutes, so that sometimes you cannot see that the evil in the world began as the evil in your home.” The structure looms like the curse of African families exploited by — and at times exploiting — the slave trade, tracing back 300 years. The unhealed wounds of slavery serve as persistent memories that are raw and revolve around this empathetic novel. The heart of this book contains families, loss, love, memory and roots. It unfolds through self-contained stories shifting between the familial bonds in West Africa and America, each character a new branch of the broken family tree. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email "Both branches of the family suffer from different forms of oppression." Old characters appear in dreams or retellings as the legacy of this family moves from Cape Coast to Kumasi to Baltimore to Harlem: Both branches of the family suffer from different forms of oppression. Effia’s side endures war with the British, resulting in colonization, while Esi’s side undergoes slavery, Civil War, lynchings and the Jim Crow era. The West African chapters contain a multilayered humanity, evoking the emotions of what was lost to those who were kidnapped and sold. For example, the sense of individual and collective identity, a plethora of customs and traditions that were oppressed in America. Identity and intimacy are wrapped within language emphasizing the importance of family and heritage. When an employer tells his servant, “We hear enough English here,” which enables her to break into Twi with relief, or when Esi tries to teach her daughter, Ness, their native tongue but receives five lashes for every Twi word the girl speaks. "The American chapters contain harrowing scenes — vivid whippings, torture, condemnation to coal mines. Even freedom contains fear." The American chapters contain harrowing scenes — vivid whippings, torture, condemnation to coal mines. Even freedom contains fear. One section details the impact of the Fugitive Slave Act, where any black person in the North were at risk to kidnapping and re-enslavement. Kojo recalls “the days of running through forests and living under floorboards” to escape the bondage, as well as the practice of showing their papers to any white person “without any back talk, always silently.” Lost heritage is prominent within the characters in America. They are mistreated because of their race and simultaneously alienated from their roots due to geographical separation, the anonymity of slavery and the loss of familial tales. "The use of Gyasi's structure emphasizes that racism has not disappeaared but merely become institutionalized." Gyasi’s use of genealogy to be chronological creates a direct, unbroken line from the original trauma of slavery in their family to present day. The use of her structure emphasizes that racism has not disappeared but merely become institutionalized. Akua, one of Effia’s descendants, speaks across eras and oceans of how the curse of enslavement is “like a fisherman casting a net into the water. He keeps only the one or two fish that he needs to feed himself and outs the rest in the water thinking that their lives will go back to normal. No one forgets that they were once captive, even if they are now free.” “Homegoing” is a beautiful work of art that contains a passionate message and cold reality. Gyasi evokes a berth of emotions by informing us of the historical way the world functions. This story’s power gives a platform and voice to these horrors not to prevent dehumanization but rather to give back the humanity that was taken from them. It is easy to become despondent over these topics or dissuaded from truly diving head first into a novel assigned in class. However, “Homegoing” is a breath of fresh air from the monotonous — it’s honest, raw and powerful. I encourage all to give this novel a chance because it contains a voice that needs to be heard. Final Grade: A Lauren Souza is a literature columnist for the Daily Cardinal. To read more of her work, click here. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Badgers compete with, come up short against another Big Ten contender Wisconsin faced another tough competitor in the Nebraska Cornhuskers, going 1-2 with only three regular season opponents remaining. By Justin Alpert April 25, 2023 | 11:38am CDT Wisconsin Softball (23-16, 8-7) lost two of three versus Nebraska (32-14, 12-5) last weekend in Lincoln. A week after dropping all three to conference-leading Northwestern, Wisconsin now faced the Big Ten’s second best team. The Badgers managed just one win. That said, they were within a run in both losses and once again proved that, with competent defense and better production with runners in scoring position, they could make some noise in the postseason. Friday | 7-6 L Defense, a glaring weakness in Wisconsin’s 2023 performance, has never hurt the Badgers more than it did Friday. Starter Maddie Schwartz (L, 8-10), who threw 145 pitches over 9.2 innings in the 3.5-hour affair, stomached seven earned runs thanks to five Badger errors. Wisconsin trailed 4-0 early before totaling five runs in the third and fourth innings. Catcher Christaana Angelopulos gave the Badgers a 6-5 lead in the eighth inning with an RBI walk. Yet Nebraska responded in the bottom of the inning, tying the game on a passed ball — Cornhusker Abbie Squier had singled and reached third on an error by right fielder Ava Kuszak. Squier reached third base in the 10th inning thanks to an Angelopulos error. An RBI single brought her home as the winning run. Nebraska pitcher Courtney Wallace (W, 20-8) was highly inefficient, finishing with 199 pitches in 10 innings. The conference leader in walks (89) issued eight free passes, hit a pair of batters and yielded nine hits. Wisconsin failed to capitalize on Wallace’s wildness, stealing zero bases and stranding seven runners in scoring position. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Saturday | 4-3 W Paytn Monticelli (W, 6-2) delivered her best outing thus far versus a Big Ten opponent, albeit with an uncharacteristic statline. The freshman allowed three runs (two earned) and walked a pair in six innings with no strikeouts. Monticelli dominated high school and the early part of this season by missing bats, but she can clearly be effective without racking up strikeouts. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Katie Keller doubled home a run to tie it 1-1 in the fifth inning. Nebraska then responded in the bottom of the inning, taking the lead on Brooke Andrews’ two-run triple. Facing a 3-1 deficit in the top of the seventh and at risk of suffering a sixth straight loss, Wisconsin ambushed starter Sarah Harness with three consecutive hits to begin the inning. The third, a Keller single, drove in two and tied the game. Kayla Konwent followed with a go-ahead RBI groundout. Predictably, coach Yvette Healy turned to Schwartz to protect the one-run lead. Unfazed as ever, Schwartz needed just 10 pitches to complete a perfect seventh inning and earn her third save of 2023. Sunday | 2-1 L Skylar Sirdashney’s conference-leading 14th error put a runner in scoring position to lead off the second inning. Schwartz (L, 8-11), making her third appearance in as many games, retired the next two batters before allowing a walk and a two-run double. Both runs were unearned, much like the seven on Schwartz’s line from Friday. Molly Schlosser pulled an RBI single in the third to make it 2-1, but Wisconsin never scored again. That wasn’t for a lack of opportunities, though, as the Badgers left six runners in scoring position in the series finale. Nebraska’s Wallace (W, 21-8) threw another 145 pitches and walked another five batters. Once again, Wisconsin failed to make Wallace pay for her control issues. Walking, not running The Badgers drew 18 walks, tallied 23 hits and struck out only 12 times in the three-game series. While Nebraska is a formidable opponent, Wisconsin must convert all those baserunners into far more than 11 runs. A lack of speed continues to hurt the Badgers, who have totaled three stolen bases over their last six games. Opposing pitchers will be more inclined to attack the zone if Wisconsin can find a way to steal more bags and push more runners into scoring position. By her lofty standards, Konwent had a fairly quiet weekend with just a pair of singles. She did draw four walks and drive in a pair of runs, but Wisconsin’s lineup isn’t nearly as threatening when Konwent, the program’s all-time home runs leader, isn’t lifting the ball and slugging. Still, her 1.207 OPS ranks fourth in the conference and her .531 OBP ranks third. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Freshman second baseman Rylie Crane has cooled off following her early-season hot streak. Her average has dropped from .300 to .250 over the last 11 games, a span during which she’s failed to tally an extra-base hit and has drawn only two walks. Crane stole a base this weekend and her four steals are tied for second-most on the roster — she could be a candidate to run more in the last few couple weeks of the season. The massive innings load and refusal to yield earned runs have lowered Schwartz’s ERA to a sparkling 1.47. In the Big Ten, only Penn State’s Bailey Parshall boasts a better ERA (1.34). Schwartz has remarkably allowed only two runs in her last 55 innings of work, yet Wisconsin has gone 5-6 in those games. The season is nearly three months old and the Badgers still can’t solve their defensive woes, which continue to overshadow Schwartz’s dominance. Going 1-5 against Northwestern and Nebraska put Wisconsin in a tough spot, as the Badgers are now in seventh place in the Big Ten with just eight games remaining. Silver linings aside, close losses won’t cut it going forward if Wisconsin wants a favorable seed in the Big Ten Tournament. The Badgers host Minnesota (28-16, 9-6) for a Tuesday doubleheader before heading east for a three-game set at Maryland (31-15, 7-10). Add the regular-season finale versus Iowa (28-20, 8-9) into the equation, and Wisconsin has eight winnable games ahead. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Why do leaves change colors in the fall? The chemical explanation behind the beauty of fall foliage. By Cassidy Darling October 31, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Ever wondered what exactly causes the leaves to shift from green to yellow, orange and red in fall? Turns out, it all comes down to the naturally occurring pigments and chemical transformations within the leaves. The key pigment is chlorophyll. This molecule turns sunlight into energy for the plant in the process called photosynthesis, University of Wisconsin-Madison chemistry professor emeritus Bassam Shakhashiri told The Daily Cardinal. “The leaves are green because they are giant factories for chlorophyll. Chlorophyll is a green pigment. Other chemicals are there also, but they are masked. They’re hidden by the immense presence of chlorophyll,” Shakhashiri said. Chlorophyll absorbs blue and red light from the sun and reflects green. This reflected light is what we see, causing the leaves to appear green. During the summer, the leaves are rich in chlorophyll as it is necessary to perform photosynthesis. However, the amount of chlorophyll present in the leaves is not constant throughout the year. In the fall, everything starts to change, and chlorophyll is destroyed as the trees prepare for winter. “When the temperature drops down more, the chlorophyll factories begin to shut down,” Shakhashiri said. This is when the other chemical pigments that were previously masked begin to shine through. Carotenoids, one of these pigments, appear yellow due to their absorption of blue and blue-green light. The carotenoids are destroyed at a slower rate than the chlorophyll, turning the leaves more yellow as chlorophyll content decreases. But what about the red and orange leaves we see? These are caused by other pigments called anthocyanins. Some trees create anthocyanins in the late summer and fall in order to prevent damage caused by the slowing of photosynthesis. As chlorophyll production decreases, the leaf can turn less and less of the sunlight it receives into energy, and any extra absorbed sunlight only causes trouble. Anthocyanins act as a shield against sunlight from entering the leaf, preventing damage and also reflecting red light. So, if a leaf has carotenoids and anthocyanins present, it will reflect both yellow and red light, appearing orange. Red leaves occur when the anthocyanin pigment is the only one left. “When these other chemicals begin to be observed, it gives us dazzling views and a very, very impressive panorama of colors,” said Shakhashiri. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The vivid display of colors in the trees in the fall is an illustration of the idea that everything we interact with can ultimately be reduced to the actions of molecules, Shakhashiri said. “It prompts an appreciation for the complexity of the beautiful, chemical world that we live in,” said Shakhashiri. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
A Board of Regents policy change will allow UW System schools to grant businesses and other organizations the naming rights to buildings, potentially creating a new revenue source. Photo by Jeff Miller | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW System’s 2024 review proposes major changes amid financial debate As the University of Wisconsin System navigates its 2024 review, sweeping proposals and financial debates bring the system’s future into focus. By Alaina Walsh December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin System faces significant financial and structural decisions following the release of its 2024 review Monday that highlights ongoing budgetary struggles and governance debates. Recommendations by a legislative committee looking into the future of the state’s public university system, to separate UW-Madison from other campuses and a contentious budget request display the challenges of balancing fiscal responsibility with educational equity. Legislative leaders remain divided on the path forward, signaling a critical juncture for Wisconsin’s higher education landscape. Earlier this year, UW System leaders requested $855 million in state funding for the 2025-27 biennium, noting that Wisconsin ranks 43rd in state funding for its public universities. The proposed funding aims to address rising operational costs, staff wage increases and initiatives supporting mental health and academic services. Legislators including Rep. Amanda Nedweski, R-Pleasant Prairie, have dismissed the request as unrealistic, pointing to Wisconsin’s higher investments in the state’s technical colleges as a mitigating factor. Among the most contentious recommendations is the potential separation of UW-Madison from the rest of the UW System. Advocate, Nedweski, argues that creating distinct governance structures could address enrollment declines and financial deficits at regional campuses while allowing Madison to leverage its unique strengths independently. Critics, including UW Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin and Gov. Tony Evers, however, warn that such a move could exacerbate inequities across the system and undermine the collective identity of Wisconsin’s public universities. Budget negotiations are further complicated by political battles over UW System diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) positions. A recent deal between the UW System and Republican legislators sought to eliminate DEI programming while releasing previously withheld pay raises and funding key infrastructure projects, including a new engineering building at UW-Madison. However, this compromise has drawn criticism from both sides, with Republicans pushing for further DEI cuts and Democrats defending the system’s inclusivity initiatives. Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, has been a central figure in these debates, advocating for ideological reforms at the state’s public universities. Last week, Vos responded to the UW System budget request saying that it was likely a nonstarter, despite UW System’s President Jay Rothman agreeing to Republican demands regarding DEI programming. Vos did not respond for a comment. With Wisconsin’s $4 billion budget surplus, stakeholders remain divided on how best to allocate resources to balance the system’s immediate needs with long-term stability. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Creator Peter Kiesewalter and violinist Whitney La Grange. Photo courtesy of Peter Kiesewalter. ARTS The Moth Project to spread its wings at Overture Center Peter Kiesewalter of The Moth Project spoke with The Daily Cardinal about his influences for science-art fusion. By Sonia Bendre October 23, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The Moth Project, an original production composed of 12 songs set to moth videography, will show at the Overture Center for the Arts on Oct. 24 at 8 p.m. The 75-minute show features Grammy-nominated creator Peter Kiesewalter as pianist and his partner Whitney La Grange as violinist, both dressed in white. Throughout the show, images and videos of moths project onto a screen behind them. The media is from around the world, but many of the shots are from Kiesewalter’s own cottage in Canada. Kiesewalter first conceived of the idea during the COVID-19 pandemic, when he spent time at the cottage in Canada with his brother, an interpretive naturalist, and the two’s six collective children. Kiesewalter was out of work and worrying about how to pay rent. While at the cottage, his brother, usually a birder, picked up “mothing,” at one point documenting 87 species of moths in a single night. Kiesewalter was astounded. “I've been coming to this cottage for 45 years, and I didn't even know,” he said. “I thought there were the brown ones and the ones that eat your socks, basically.” He started paying attention, and over months of campfires, The Moth Project came together. Two years later, it aired for the first time at a town hall near the cottage. The second show was in Cleveland at the National Association for Interpretation Conference, where it received glowing reviews. Kiesewalter was inspired by a broader movement in science to use art to raise awareness of climate change, reaching people in a way that impacts them emotionally. “[Scientists] were saying, ‘we’ve got to figure out other ways to get the message across that the world needs our attention,’” he said. The Moth Project has since been presented at botanical gardens, academic conferences and theaters across Canada and the United States. The show contains covers and six original songs, inspired by classical, bluegrass and R&B music. Bach and Joni Mitchell covers play alongside original works with titles like “Emergence” and “Pheromones.” “That's by design, to reflect the diversity of the moth species,” Kiesewalter said. “There's 160,000 different moth species, so I thought that a show about or inspired by moths warranted a sort of eclectic musical palette. All the music in the show is from different parts of my musical education and upbringing.” Kiesewalter, who plays the clarinet, saxophone, piano and accordion among other instruments, currently resides in New York with La Grange and two of their children. He moved to New York after graduating from Ottawa University with degrees in classical clarinet and jazz saxophone performance. In New York, he found klezmer, a style of Jewish instrumental folk music. At various points in his life, he has also played jazz, Americana, bluegrass, Cajun and zydeco music. All of these, he says, feature to some degree in The Moth Project. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email From 1999 to 2005, Kiesewalter worked for ABC News as the resident composer, writing scores for films, shows and television productions. After working at ABC, Kiesewalter started a rock band called the East Village Opera Company that played modern renditions of classical opera music in German, Italian and French. The band signed a record deal with Universal Studios, received an Emmy Award and was nominated for a Grammy. Kiesewalter played with the East Village Opera Company for eight years. Since then, he has produced commercially and for individual artists. The Moth Project is a return to the road for Kiesewalter, and a welcome one. “I like the details of putting a show together and making things work smoothly,” Kiesewalter said. “I do still like getting in front of people and moving people… It fuels me.” Kiesewalter integrated the story of his parents’ immigration from Germany into the project, where he connected their migration to moth migration. “It's a pretty common story, like the migration story of lots of animals,” Kiesewalter said. “Migration stories are generally stories of: why do these animals or people move? The main reason is survival. Germany after the war was decimated. There was nothing.” His parents moved to Canada in the 1950s and “worked their asses off” to stay, Kiesewalter said. “All of the same things that affect the moth, or all of nature, affect my parents — life, death, transformation, metamorphosis, migration. It's a very personal show,” Kiesewalter said. Kiesewalter hopes The Moth Project will inspire viewers to pay more attention to nature for their own sake. “Being mindful of nature doesn't have to be a chore or an effort,” Kiesewalter said. “You don't have to do it for the benefit of the earth. Do it for the benefit of yourself, because the sheer beauty of it is all the reason we need to actually start treating the earth a little better.” In contrast to the negativity often surrounding climate change, Kiesewalter tries to employ the same messaging that ecologist and author Robin Wall Kimmerer uses in “Braiding Sweetgrass”: the Earth is a gift, and our connection to it is sacred. “Nature, moths, are incredibly beautiful. Pay attention to them for a sec, and it'll change the way that you integrate with the natural world,” he said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Courtesy of A24 ARTS ‘Priscilla’ throws a chair at Elvis’ sanitized reputation By Bryna Goeking November 30, 2023 | 4:00am CST It was hard to be online in 2022 without seeing pictures and videos of Austin Butler’s take on Elvis Presley, a movie aptly titled “Elvis” for its focus on the rock ’n’ roll megastar’s rise and fall. Few people talk about “Priscilla,” both the movie and the forgotten woman in Elvis’s life. Elvis Presley is undeniably an American icon of music, film and pop culture — but the Elvis renaissance of 2022 cast aside many dark aspects of his life, aspects which left undeniable, lasting impacts on those around him. “Priscilla” tells the story of the marriage between Elvis Presley and Priscilla Beaulieau-Presley. While Baz Lurhman’s biopic glosses over the questionable parts of their love affair, director Sofia Coppola embraces it in full force. The story was adapted from Beaulieau-Presley’s 1985 biography “Elvis and Me,” following the 14-year love affair between herself and the King. Fourteen is an important number in this story as it was Priscilla’s age when she first met and was pursued by Elvis. More than just an Elvis exposé, “Priscilla” is the story of finding yourself as a young woman in an abusive relationship. It offers a fresh perspective on the biopic genre by telling the story of a woman often forgotten. The film runs from start to finish with beautiful cinematography, sound and performances. Cailee Spaeny, who plays the titular character, perfectly embodies the innocence of childhood while falling for the most famous man in the world. Her demure, soft voice and petite character are perfectly juxtaposed with Jacob Elordi’s extreme height as Elvis. Following the Elvis renaissance led by Baz Luhrman’s 2022 biopic, “Priscilla” could not have come at a better time. Luhrman’s retelling focused on the glamor and theatricality of Elvis’ life, glossing over the problematic aspects, including how Elvis stole music from Black musicians and pursued a relationship with a teenage girl. “Elvis” portrays Priscilla like many women in history — the passive, soft-spoken, agreeable bride — until the end of their marriage. Rarely do we see Priscilla outside of a conversation with Elvis. It’s true that “Elvis” is meant to focus on Elvis’ life and his relationship with his manager Colonel Parker, but a biopic just shy of three hours fails to give Priscilla any real autonomy. “Elvis” casts her as nothing more than an accessory. Priscilla met Elvis when she was 14-years-old and moved into Graceland with him before her 18th birthday. Throughout “Priscilla,” we see a young girl struggling with a sense of identity in a world that defines her by her relationship with such a famous figure. She even struggles to define herself as an individual. Elvis is constantly asserting his power over her — choosing what she wears and how she does her makeup — and throws a chair at her when she verbalizes disagreement. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email By the end of the movie, it’s hard not to feel suffocated. Watching Priscilla leave Graceland at the end of the movie feels like a breath of fresh air, the start of a new life. So is “Elvis” or “Priscilla” the best retelling of this American love story? There’s not one answer. They were created to tell separate stories. But “Priscilla” tells the story often forgotten, a story of girlhood, growing up and the dark sides of fame. For that reason, “Priscilla” is a more necessary story than “Elvis.” Very few live a life comparable to that of Elvis, but many young women can relate to the story of an abusive partner who may have taken advantage of their age and innocence. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
A beer can balloon decoration is displayed at the Taste of Madison on August 31, 2024. Photo by Madeline Wooten | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE A foodie’s dream: Taste of Madison bonds community, spotlights local vendors The annual Taste of Madison Food Festival brought Madisonians together through unique food vendors and live entertainment over Labor Day weekend. By Madeline Wooten September 5, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The annual Taste of Madison Food Festival was a success this past Labor Day weekend at the Madison State Capitol Square. With over 80 local vendors, two stages, 10 different music artists and other streets full of vendors, citizens experienced all of the unique flavors Madison has to offer. The annual festival has been put on by Madison Festivals Inc. since 1983. Madison Festivals Inc. owns and runs The Taste of Madison along with the Madison Marathon. The festival is paid for through beverage sales and sponsors along with the work of several volunteers, and they also serve as a nonprofit organization that aims to raise money to give back to the Dane County community. The affordable price point allowed Madison foodies to try all of the different Madison restaurants in the same place without running all over the city. With a free entrance fee and items priced from $1 to $6, it was an affordable option to taste all different kinds of Madison food. The purpose of the event is to “bring together people, businesses and charities through world-class events that positively impact the community,” according to the Taste of Madison website.” Additionally, the festival works hard every year to give back to the community, with over $2 million in food sales going back directly to restaurants and businesses. With many unique food vendors, everyone was busy at the two-day-long festival. Lines for vendors would round the square, and popular vendors sold out of their yummy items early into the night. But food wasn’t the limit for entertainment. People took over the lush greenery around the capital with blankets and chairs as they listened to their favorite artists with full bellies. Country and rock headliners Chayce Beckham and Matt Stell performed on Saturday and Sunday, respectively. The festival included other activities such as “Playtopia” for families with children and a recharge zone for those who needed to take a break. While the festival brought the Madison food community together, there was still competition between the food vendors. The 2024 Best of the Taste of Madison contest highlighted vendors in eight different categories including: Appetizer, American, Asian, Dessert, Latin American, Mediterranean/Caribbean/Jamaican, Southern/Southwestern and Vegetarian/Vegan. All these unique categories brought more business to the winners of the contest. They all showcased the different types of cuisine at the festival. Although the Taste of Madison is over for 2024, the very popular Dane County Farmers’ Market will continue every Saturday until Nov. 9 as a way to provide the Madison community local produce. And coming up on Sep. 12 and Oct. 17 from 5 to 9 p.m., the Madison Night Market is another way the city of Madison continues to promote the practice of supporting local restaurants and businesses of different cultures and bring people together with food through distinctive events year-round. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Dane County leaders call for Hmong translators, building funds at public hearing Citizens and nonprofit leaders voiced concern over the Dane County budget at a public hearing Oct. 9, calling for increased funding for translators and facilities. By Maria Knaack October 17, 2024 | 5:00am CDT The Dane County Board of Supervisors held a public hearing Oct. 9 for community members to voice budget requests to the County Board of Supervisors. Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn proposed the new 2025 budget in September, featuring significant cuts from last year’s budget. The proposed budget, totaling $903 million, cuts nearly 7% from 2024, partially in response to the end of pandemic-era federal aid from the American Rescue Plan. During the hearing, members of the public, primarily nonprofit leaders and union members, expressed concern over reduced funding. Many attendees spoke in favor of setting aside funds to hire a Hmong translator at the county level in order to help Hmong speakers access and utilize government programs and assistance. Six members of the Southeast Asian Healing Center (SEAHC), ranging from college students and employees of the center to the elders in need of this assistance, explained how vital services are currently inaccessible to those who do not speak English. “Language barrier is one of our main concerns. . . this role would serve as a vital bridge between Hmong speakers and the local government by ensuring our community is served properly and gets the services that are so needed,” said Doua Vang, executive director of SEAHC. In addition to SEAHC, other leaders of nonprofits expressed concerns over a possible lack of funding. Anne Maestrick, the executive director of Sunshine Place, described her organization as a “resource hub for those facing hardship” that has been recognized as a model agency working towards ending homelessness. Maestrick asked the board to provide $2 million in the budget for Sunshine Place to replace one of their buildings, which, in addition to improving the condition of facilities, would give them more space to add new services, including mental health services. Sun Prairie Food Pantry President Mark Thompson also voiced support for Sunshine Place and briefly advocated for support of the Sun Prairie Food Pantry, but without specific metrics. Members of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees union (AFSCME) also offered a few amendments to the budget that revolved around valuable county locations, including the Dane County Airport, Henry Vilas Zoo and the Alliant Energy Center. AFSCME members discussed adding new employees to these locations, such as janitorial staff, mechanics and events coordinators. They explained these positions could be budget neutral by replacing current positions which are unnecessary or are ending after this year, and they would replace outsourcing that is currently needed. The Board of Supervisors will continue to review and finalize the budget, considering these requests. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “The budget is determined based on the needs of the communities it serves. It is important that members of the community are given the opportunity to contribute at every step of the process,” Chair Patrick Miles stated in an Oct. 1 press release. The finalized budget is scheduled to be released in late October. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of Greg Marks/NOAA Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory/Flickr Quagga mussels from a fish trawl sample photographed in Lake Michigan, August 2006. SCIENCE Discovery of invasive mussels in Lake Geneva deepens Wisconsin’s water crisis Quagga mussels, an invasive species first discovered in Lake Geneva last month, threaten the ecological balance of Wisconsin’s lakes and motivate new conservation efforts. By Elaina Russell September 26, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In a concerning development for Wisconsin’s cherished lakes, local and state officials discovered invasive quagga mussels in Geneva Lake last month, marking the first recorded presence of this species in an inland lake in the state. The find, confirmed by the Geneva Lake Environmental Agency (GLEA) after routine monitoring, raised significant environmental concerns among advocates and local communities alike. What are quagga mussels? Quagga mussels (Dreissena rostriformis bugensis), native to the Dnieper River in Ukraine, were first introduced to the Great Lakes in 1989, likely through ballast water from international shipping. They have spread rapidly across North America since then, outcompeting native species and disrupting local ecosystems. Unlike zebra mussels, another invasive species that poses a threat to freshwater environments, quagga mussels have demonstrated a greater capacity for adaptation and resilience. They thrive in colder, deeper waters, allowing them to inhabit a broader range of ecosystems. “Knowing what we know about quaggas and their ability to live on soft bottoms, it will be very important to monitor how they do in inland lakes,” said Jake Vander Zanden, professor and director of the Center of Limnology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Quagga mussels can also filter vast amounts of water, leading to increased clarity but ultimately reducing the population of phytoplankton that are crucial for the food web. As these mussels proliferate, they can alter nutrient cycles and affect the growth of aquatic plants and animals, potentially leading to significant ecological imbalances. Quagga mussels disrupt local ecosystems The introduction of quagga mussels into Geneva Lake raised alarms about the potential ecological repercussions not just for the lake itself, but for Wisconsin’s waterways as a whole, including Lake Mendota. As the largest lake in the Madison area, Lake Mendota is home to a diverse array of fish and other aquatic organisms. The interconnectedness of Wisconsin’s waterways means that an invasive species in one lake can easily spread to another through boat traffic, fishing gear or natural water movements. Lake Mendota faces its own set of challenges from invasive species, such as zebra mussels and the spiny water flea, which have already disrupted local ecosystems. The introduction of quagga mussels could exacerbate these issues, further threatening the lake’s biodiversity and the recreational activities that depend on it. Anglers, boaters and nature enthusiasts who frequent these waters may find their experiences diminished as invasive species take hold. Discovery sparks community conservation efforts Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The discovery of quagga mussels in Geneva Lake galvanized local communities and environmental advocates to take action. James Olson, a Wisconsin resident and attorney at LawtonCates, is spearheading an essential environmental initiative focused on addressing the critical issue of aquatic invasive species in the state’s lakes. This initiative centers around the “home lake” rule and targets wake boats, which can unintentionally transport invasive species between water bodies. Olson is joined by his paralegal, Kelsie Kufhal, who plays a crucial role in supporting this initiative. The initiative highlights the urgent need for preventive measures in response to the recent discovery of quagga mussels in Geneva Lake. Olson encourages community members to participate in monitoring efforts and practices for preventing the spread of invasive species. Collaboration among local agencies, environmental organizations and state officials will be crucial in developing effective management strategies. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources is expected to play a significant role in these efforts. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Jason Nolen and one of his three cats, Bean, who is a year old, playing together on Oct. 12, 2024. Photo by Ella Hanley | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison’s cat whisperer: The professor behind a purr-fect Instagram Jason Nolen, a sociology and criminology professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, has spent the past eight years curating a cat community among Madison residents. By Ella Hanley November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST Jason Nolen is known primarily as a sociology and criminology professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, but his living room tells a different story. Its walls are covered in cat-themed artwork, a testament to his more than eight years as a dedicated cat enthusiast. Beyond his work at UW-Madison, Nolen runs @cats_of_madison, an Instagram account showcasing different feline residents of Madison. He told The Daily Cardinal the account was created in 2016 on a whim after he posted photos of a neighborhood cat to his personal account and noticed there was no account dedicated to Madison’s cats. Now, the account has amassed more than 27,000 followers and features daily posts of cats that Nolen has personally come across on porches, at shelters and in people’s homes. “After it became popular, I was like, okay, the pressure's on,” Nolen said. “Then I was like, ‘Wait, where am I going to find cats to take pictures of?’ I started thinking about it, really looking for cats and I realized they’re just everywhere. Porch cats are everywhere. I kind of trained my eye to spot them.” Nolen began going on "catwalks," walking around certain neighborhoods with a high likelihood of running into a lounging porch cat. Neighborhoods east of the isthmus like Monroe Street, Marquette and Williamson Street are the “cat hot spots,” he said. As the account gained popularity, Nolen began receiving requests to photograph cats in people’s homes, which he does often and always for free. “There’s so many cats I know now that also know me and cats who are generally afraid of people that I’ve built a rapport with,” Nolen said. “They’ll come say hi, and that means a lot.” Nolen said he’d never considered himself to be good at photography. But over the years, through practice, he’s gotten better at understanding the best angles and how to get photos that really “demonstrate a cat’s personality.” "I feel like if I wanted to find a different career, I could become a cat behaviorist,” he said. “I've learned so many things, like how to behave, move or act in relation to what a cat is doing and I’ve become good at it. I've had to become good at it, so that cats will trust me and come up to me and interact with me." Nolen also said he keeps a “backlog” of photos, which will be used as content through the winter once the porch cats are back inside. Madisonians feel paw-sitive about community cat bonding Over the years, Nolen has formed partnerships with local cat shelters, including the Madison Cat Project. The shelter holds cat adoption fairs every other Saturday, and Nolen typically visits a few days beforehand to take photos of the adoptable cats ahead of the event. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Nolen said shelter workers have told him they often hear people visiting the adoption fairs to meet a cat they’d seen on Cats of Madison. He also gets direct messages from followers, which he loves. “People tell me my account is the best part of their day,’” Nolen said. “When people say things like that, it almost makes me want to start crying. I feel so happy.” Additionally, Nolen has facilitated reunions of people and their lost cats, and when a beloved neighborhood cat passes away, the community grieves together. “When I find out a cat I’ve posted about has passed, I always make sure to honor them. If it’s a cat I've posted a photo of before, I’ll share all the posts I did about them in my stories, along with their name and flowers on either side,” said Nolen. “I don’t say ‘RIP,’ but the flowers show that they’ve passed. Cats of Madison becomes this kind of community space for shared grief, which means a lot to me.” Cats on campus Nolen became a lecturer at UW-Madison in fall 2022 and has taught sociology, ethnicity and criminology classes. Next semester, he will teach Sociology of Companion Animals at UW-Madison, a course he will create based on his “field experience” with pets. “In my criminology class, though, I’ve shown pictures and videos of my cats. I’ve told students — I've done this in past semesters too — to send me pictures of their pets and tell me a little about them,” Nolen said. “Then, at the start of lecture, I’ll take the first minute to say, ‘Here’s so-and-so’s pet,’ and I’ll share interesting stuff about them. Students really seem to like that.” However, he never tells his students about his Instagram accounts, including @dogs.of.madison, and generally waits until a student realizes that it’s him to say something. “The best part about all this for me is that I've made so many cat friends,” Nolen said. “And I know that it's maybe a little bizarre, but it's become an important part of my social life. And that's really meaningful to me, because I really love cats." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
courtesy of 4 proof film ARTS ‘Do Not Expect Too Much From the End of the World’ is a bold, brash film about the modern world The Romanian film is a provocative look on modern living. By Joseph Panzer April 19, 2024 | 2:00am CDT “Do Not Expect Too Much From the End of the World” is a shamelessly modern and irreverent film, blending cinema history with politics in a way that is refreshing and captivating, reminding us of what movies can do. The film is about a hectic day in the life of Angela, a young production assistant in Bucharest, as she drives around to interview those injured in workplace accidents for a workplace safety advertisement. The first thing that’s apparent about the film is its intense cultural critique with a deep knowledge of cinema history. The film introduces the title of its first part on a notecard in a not-so-subtle nod to the music video for Bob Dylan’s “Subterranean Homesick Blues.” This sets the stage for the metatextual style director Radu Jude employs to comment on the contemporary Western world by extensively referencing other films and cinema history. Like Dylan, Jude uses references to previous works to create his own artistic themes regarding the absurdities of the current political moment defined by wars, the rise of far-right ideology and increasing corporatism. The film heavily draws footage from the 1981 Romanian film “Angela Goes On,” incorporating characters from that film and splicing in scenes to convey that despite the collapse of communism and all of the social change of the past 40 years, neither Romania’s working conditions nor culture have significantly changed. The black-and-white cinematography and the conversations regarding current political developments like the Russia-Ukrainian War and the death of Elizabeth II call to mind the 1960s work of Jean-Luc Godard, a filmmaker explicitly mentioned in Jude’s film. This can be seen as Jude drawing a parallel between himself and Godard in their examination of how cinema responds to and influences the world. It’s a lot to chew on, but “Do Not Expect Too Much From the End of the World” is a film that takes a humorously unabashed look at the confusion of a post-COVID world defined by late-stage capitalism. Playing with more modern media formats, many of the film’s color sequences during Part A come from the use of Instagram and TikTok videos, where Angela uses filters to adopt a sex-obsessed, misogynistic alter ego as a parody of influencers like Andrew Tate. This serves as an ingenious commentary on the mind numbing content being pushed through algorithms while also engaging with digital media. The best part of the film is its humor. The entire picture is saturated with gallows humor that delightfully pokes fun at everything from the gig economy to the American epidemic of mass shootings, causing the auditorium at the April 7 Wisconsin Film Festival screening to constantly erupt in laughter. This is a film that knows exactly what it wants to say and knows how to say it in a way that is never intrusive but fresh and exciting with each new punchline. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Zoe Bendoff | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET Hey Morgan! I’m from a warm-weather state and the slush is dragging down my walk to class, do you have any advice? Welcome to Wisconsin. Stay out of my way and buy some boots. By Morgan McCormack January 25, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Q: Hey Morgan! I’m a freshman and completely new to Wisconsin. I’m originally from a warmer state and was warned about Midwest winters and the snow and cold, but I was never told about slush and ice. I’m having some difficulty getting to class. Do you have any advice? All break I had to see my friends go home to beautiful, sunny California or Florida or whatever. I had to hear them laughing when my power went out due to the snow. I waited, though, because I knew the second we all stepped back on campus, I would land on my feet and you would all land on your backs. Listen — not to sound like an elitist, but as a native Wisconsinite, this is the only time I get to. You better start practicing how to walk through slush and puddles and ice because I have a 13-minute walk I need to do in a 15-minute break, and I will roller derby body slam you to the ground if you’re in my way. My advice is to invest in boots with good traction. don’t be afraid to jump over the obstacles and try to act like this is just another day. If I can sense you never spent a recess on the blacktop because you forgot your snow pants in elementary school, I will use it against you. Hope this helps! Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Morgan McCormackMorgan McCormack is the beet editor for The Daily Cardinal. More I graduated from PETA University. Now I electroejaculate monkeys Catch me feds! I ballot stuffed 450 times in the 2024 election I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university
The Killer. (Featured) Michael Fassbender as an assassin in The Killer. Cr. Netflix ©2023 Photo by Courtesy of Netflix | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ‘The Killer’ is a David Fincher film, but not in the way you’d think A sleek, modern thriller that isn’t about the thrills By Spencer Ball December 1, 2023 | 2:00am CST From “Se7en” to “Zodiac” to “Mindhunter,” director David Fincher has always been fascinated with the psychology of violent killers. It says something that Silicon Valley tech bros and a man that ages backward are among his more normal, well-adjusted main characters. Up to this point, Fincher’s focus has been on the long arm of the law pursuing deranged criminals who populate his films. A large part of Fincher’s personal brand is his blend of thriller, criminal psychology and procedural aspects as various flavors of detectives investigate the darkest patches of society. To follow a killer himself, then, seems relatively straightforward for Fincher. Drop the procedure, ramp up the psychology and keep the thriller. This would be a natural fit for Fincher’s newest collaboration with screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker, who wrote the award-winning screenplay for “Se7en.” Instead, Fincher and Walker make a bolder choice: relegating thrills and psychology to the backstage to make Fincher’s most procedural work to date. “The Killer” isn’t particularly concerned with why its protagonist kills — that’s just his job. Instead, the film examines how he kills, how he lives and what he does when things go wrong. “The Killer” is a story about planning and execution, not the act of killing itself. And therein lies the other side to Fincher’s brand: the anal, exacting pursuit of perfection. The film opens in Paris, where Michael Fassbender’s unnamed character prepares for just another hit job. Despite the week of preparation before he pulls the trigger, he botches it. In the aftermath, both he and the woman he loves are threatened. The rest of the film follows him on an international trip from city to city as he visits loose ends, one by one. Along the way, he insists the mission isn’t personal. Much of Fassbender’s frequent narration is dedicated to a repeated mantra reminding him to forbid empathy and do only what he is paid to do. But with each encounter he has with a professional peer-turned-target, it becomes increasingly clear Fassbender is lying to the audience and himself. “The Killer” thus offers a refreshingly creative way of delving into the character’s psyche, slowly unveiling the contradiction between what he says and what he does in a way that never feels trite. “The Killer” uses its premise to explore the depersonalization of the modern world. The protagonist hides behind the guise of impersonal, virtually faceless figures throughout: a janitor, a German tourist or an airplane passenger with the name of a classic sitcom character. He frequently uses contemporary affordances such as Amazon drop boxes, scheduled FedEx deliveries and even an abandoned WeWork office to aid his missions. It is striking how easy the killer carries out his machinations while rarely speaking to another person. The film positions itself as a meditation on our tech-facilitated and gig-oriented economy, highlighting the ways in which innovation and convenience rob our individual humanity. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One of the more delightful parts of the film (or less delightful, depending on how much you separate art from artist) is its soundtrack, populated almost entirely by The Smiths. It’s an inspired choice — Morrisey’s longing vocals playing through the protagonist’s iPod are the perfect backdrop to the killer’s disaffected musings and detached vantages. His “Work Mixtape” (which one suspects is not too different from his Focus Mixtape or Sleep Sounds) fits that of a seemingly hyper-calculating professional who’s really a bit of a melonhead. There’s also more than a little dramatic irony in how and when Fincher deploys The Smiths. “How Soon Is Now?” plays as he waits for his heartbeat to slow enough for him to take a sniper shot. “Bigmouth Strikes Again” plays as he travels to confront a shady lawyer in his office. “Girlfriend In A Coma” plays after — well, you can probably guess this one. To be frank, stretches of “The Killer'' are a bit boring — plot wise, at least. That isn’t necessarily a knock on the film; it seems very much intentional. In fact, the first line of the film is a lament on how “physically exhausting it can be to do nothing.” Confining the audience to the killer’s world of mundanity, while making for a more arduous watch than some of Fincher’s work, allows viewers to feel the detachment and alienation at the heart of the narrative. Those expecting the energy of “Se7en” or “Fight Club” are likely to be disappointed, but “The Killer” delivers a tightly crafted, stylistically immersive procedural that makes narrative from method. Fassbender’s calculating and entertainingly philosophizing protagonist invites us to consider the killer — murderous or not — that may be present in all of us. Final Smiths count: 11. Grade: A- “The Killer” is available to stream on Netflix. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin loses winning record at Clearwater Invitational With a much more challenging schedule, the Wisconsin Badgers softball team lost all five games in Florida at the Clearwater Invitational. By Abby Shulman February 18, 2024 | 4:41pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers softball team dropped five straight tough losses and lost its winning record for the season Thursday, Friday, and Saturday at the Clearwater Invitational in Florida. Wisconsin took on the No. 4 Georgia Bulldogs in the first match of Thursday’s doubleheader. The Badgers led 4-0 by the end of the second, with RBIs from outfielder Brooke Kuffel and infielder Alivia Bark and a homerun from infielder Ellie Hubbard. The Bulldogs and the Badgers went back and forth for ten innings, with freshman Eden Echevarria crashing the party with the first hit of her career. It was an incredibly close game until Wisconsin fell short at the finish line and lost 6-7, no thanks to four fielding errors. During the bottom of the 10th, starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo came back and intentionally walked two batters, hoping the runner on third would be forced out at home, but Georgia singled down the middle to win the game. Wisconsin fell one run short in the second game of Thursday’s double-header, losing 5-6 to the No. 18 Kentucky Wildcats. Once again, the Badgers began with an early lead, this time 3-0 by the end of the first after catcher Emmy Wells crushed a first inning three-run homer over the left-field fence. Kentucky evened out the score in the second, pushing pitcher Gabi Salo out of the game and welcoming relief pitcher Shelby Jacobson. The Wildcats rallied to take the lead, but the Badgers tied the game 4-4 after outfielder Peyton Bannon stole home in the fourth. Kentucky then stole the lead back 4-6 after a sac bunt and a Wisconsin throwing error. Bannon scored again for Wisconsin with an RBI from catcher Hilary Blomberg, but the Badgers fell short in the rally after a closing double play from Kentucky. The Badgers dropped two more losses in Friday games. Wisconsin’s luck wasn’t any better in Friday’s doubleheader, losing to the No. 6 Oklahoma State Cowgirls and the UCF Knights. With two-run blasts from outfielder Brooke Kuffel and infielder Alivia Bark and an RBI single from infielder Ava Kuszak, the Badgers dominated OSU’s pitching in the first three innings, leading 5-2. The game slowed for the Badgers after the third when OSU’s bullpen was brought in, but the game had just started for the Cowgirls, who ended up finding their offense to win 5-9. In the Badgers’ second game of the day, Wisconsin and UCF rallied steadily back and forth until the Knights proved their dominance with an eight-run sixth inning, forcing the Badgers into a 9-21 loss. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The high-scoring game started with UCF scoring two single home runs off of Magnanimo in the first, which infielder Fiona Girardot evened out with her two-run single for Wisconsin. The second inning mirrored the first, with two runs from the Knights as the Badgers caught up with a homerun from Bannon. After two more runs from UCF in the third, Wisconsin one-upped them and took the lead 8-7 with hits from Bark, Blomberg and Wells to close the inning. UCF then collected six runs in the next two innings while Wisconsin found only one, a solo homer from Bark’s. Finally, Salo allowed eight runs from the Knights in the sixth inning to trigger the run role and close the game at 21-9. Wisconsin ended the tournament with one final loss on Saturday. Wisconsin also fell in their last game Saturday as the No. 5 Washington Huskies dominated both sides of the field. The Badgers lost 1-9— their fewest runs scored in a game the season— as their season record nosedived to 4-6. Continuing the strong starting trend for Wisconsin, Giradot hit a solo home run in the second, the team’s only run of the game and one of just the two hits, the other being from catcher Emily Bojan in the fifth. Meanwhile, Wisconsin’s pitchers walked eight Huskies and threw five wild pitches. Despite not sufficiently fighting through the five games in Clearwater, Wisconsin still notched home runs in all five games. The Badgers will look to regain their groove back next week in California at the Mary Nutter Collegiate Classic on Feb. 22-24. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Dane County executive signs 2025 budget proposal to increase housing and service opportunities Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn signed the 2025 Dane County budget, focusing on investing in families and the community. By Marin Rosen November 11, 2024 | 1:10pm CST Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn signed the 2025 Dane County budget Nov. 4, that will focus on affordable housing and access to community services alongside the Dane County Board of Supervisors. Kuhn’s budget proposal totals $926 million. The operating budget is $813 million while the capital plan is $112 million, a nearly 7% decrease from 2024. The cut in spending is a result of pandemic-era federal aid expiring. The proposed tax rate is $2.57 per $1,000 of equalized value, down from $2.73 in 2024 and the lowest it has been since 2010. “This budget prioritizes community needs by identifying and funding gaps in services while ensuring we are good stewards of taxpayer dollars,” Kuhn said in a Nov. 4 release. County Board Chair Patrick Miles said the 2025 budget is a “reflection of the values and priorities we all have to serve the Dane County community.” Highlights of Kuhn’s 2025 budget proposal include: Over $30 million for housing and housing supports. Enhance access for veterans to programs they are eligible for. Additional capacity for services in Adult Protective Services for those in need. Funds to establish a Dementia Care Stabilization Unit. Increase language access in multiple departments to county services. Increase support for reentry and jail diversion programs. $10 million commitment to the Dane County Conservation Fund. Investments to the Alliant Energy Center campus and funding for next steps of the Exposition Hall expansion. $16.6 million in county highway projects across the County. $2 million in capital financing to expand access to Sunshine Place, a community resource hub serving eastern Dane County. Newly elected Dane County Executive Melissa Agard will have the power to approve or veto the finalized budget proposal once in office. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of Sue Jennik CITY NEWS Q&A: League of Women Voters president talks state constitutional amendment change, top concerns for women in upcoming election Sue Jennik, president of the League of Women Voters of Dane County, discussed top concerns for women voters and what a proposed state constitutional amendment change could mean for Wisconsin women. By Kayla Northway October 23, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The League of Women Voters is a nonpartisan grassroots organization working to protect and expand voting rights. Dane County’s League of Women Voters is one of 21 leagues in Wisconsin with over 500 members and is headed by president Sue Jennik. Jennik grew up in Milwaukee before moving to New York City, where she worked for 40 years as an attorney representing unions before moving back to Wisconsin. Since July, she’s served as president of Dane County’s League of Women Voters, and prior to that she served as the program director for the League’s educational arm. Jennik told The Daily Cardinal she is passionate about the League because it focuses on voter rights and issues that are important to the public. On the Nov. 5th ballot, a constitutional amendment would forbid city governments from allowing non-citizens to vote in local elections. Jennik sat down with the Cardinal to explain how this amendment could impact Wisconsin residents and what the League of Women Voters is doing to inform voters of this change. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. What does the amendment entail, and why may it have a disproportionate impact on women’s voting rights? The constitutional amendment on the ballot that would change the current constitution, which says “every” citizen may vote to the limitation that “only” a citizen may vote. The concern is that that will lead to requirements that voters now have to produce documentation and proof that they are a citizen. For women, this is especially onerous because women have a birth certificate showing that they were born in this country, and then often they change their names when they get married, or they get divorced and they may get remarried. All of that documentation would have to be provided, and it may be difficult for women to produce all of them. I talked to one woman who said she would never be able to get sufficient documentation because she doesn't have her birth certificate. She has tried repeatedly to get an accurate birth certificate, and for whatever reason hasn't been able to do that, so she wouldn't be able to produce the documentation needed. It wouldn't affect non-citizens because they don't vote anyway. It would affect citizens who are not able to produce sufficient documentation to prove their citizenship. In general, this would be people who are native-born citizens who aren't able to get the documentation that they would need to show that they're entitled to vote, which could be as many as 30,000 citizens who would be denied the right to vote in Wisconsin. What was the process to pass the amendment, and why do you think they decided to pass the amendment now? In order to get a proposed amendment on the ballot, it can only be done by the state Legislature — it can't be done by a citizen petition. Unlike some other states, only the state Legislature can do it, and it has to pass two consecutive sessions of the legislature. Legislative sessions are two years long, so in 2023 they passed a proposed amendment, this one and several others. In 2024 they announced they passed it for the second time, so they announced that it would be on the ballot. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email There's an unfair perception that non-citizens, people who are not citizens, who work here, pay taxes and their kids may go to school, shouldn't be involved at all in our political life, and some localities think that they should have a say on those things. The other fear is that this would unfairly impact people of color, especially those who are perceived to be Hispanic or coming from Mexico or another South American country. It goes along with this idea that somehow immigrants are taking over. There's this anti-immigrant feeling, which, in Wisconsin, is not our tradition. There have always been migrant farm workers working in Wisconsin. Immigrants are needed to work on farms, particularly in the dairy industry where the estimate is that 75% of the workers are immigrants. Many of the people who have those farms or live in areas near those farms don't support the idea that there's a problem with having immigrants because they are an important part of the economy. They're also important in the hospitality, construction and landscaping industries, and with the low employment in Wisconsin, there really is not a danger that people are taking over jobs that others might do. The fact is, we need more workers here. What are the top concerns you’ve heard from women voters in this election, and how will these concerns affect women voters’ turnout in this election? A very big concern, of course, is reproductive rights, including abortion, access to birth control, access to IVF or anything that women need to protect their health care. Basically, women can't get the health care they need to save their lives and protect their health. Women should be able to make their own decisions about their bodies along with their doctor's advice. Another big issue that people don't talk about very much are wages. Wages are higher than they were, but in Wisconsin and federally, the minimum wage is still $7.25. The state could raise it or the federal government could raise it, but they haven't done that. Even though a lot of people get paid more than that, there's no requirement that they get paid more than that, and a lot of people are trying to survive on those minimum wage jobs, and it's very difficult to do. Do you think women in Dane County will be more motivated in this election than prior elections? The issue of reproductive rights is new for a presidential year because we didn't face that in 2020, and I think it motivates a lot of women to pay attention to the election more than they did in the past. In Dane County, there is a lot of interest in this election, and the turnout will be high. We even had the highest turnout in the state in the August election, which was 45%. I think traditionally, in the last several presidential elections, the Dane County turnout has been 80% or higher, so people are definitely motivated to vote. The League of Women Voters of Dane County does voter registration events all over the county. We've had over 100 events since the beginning of September, and a lot of them were at the DMV offices. The DMV offices have voter registration kiosks, and we have volunteers there who assist people and make sure they're registered and get them registered, or update their registration if they’ve moved –– all that kind of stuff. We have registered or helped register 1,300 people in the last couple of months and that's up from prior years, so there definitely is interest in voting. What actions are the League of Women Voters and other organizations around the state taking to raise awareness among women voters about the potential consequences of this amendment and ensuring women’s voices are heard in the face of such challenges? We have flyers about the amendment every time we do an event, every time we do any tabling, which we also do at the farmers’ markets and at community events, and we were also at the Black Women's Wellness Foundation meeting. We're always including information about that amendment at our tabling, and we do a lot of social media about that and other issues. Actually, one of the most popular of our postings is our information about the amendment, because people aren't seeing it very much otherwise. In addition to general tabling, we also have candidates' answers both online and in print, and we're distributing those now. Generally this is for local offices, and we ask them certain questions, and whatever they say, we publish their answers. It's a way to educate voters about who the candidates are and what they stand for. We also held a forum in September on the referenda that are on the ballot for the school board increases that are being sought. We educate people about why it's being proposed and why people think it's important or oppose it. We also work with a lot of different organizations. We're a central part of the voter ID coalition, a group of about at least 10 or 15 organizations, including, most prominently the NAACP. We also do work with people who are working with immigrants who want to become citizens. We've had an immigrant town hall so that when people are either preparing to become citizens or at the event right when they are sworn in as citizens, we have a table there so that they can immediately register to vote. So we work with organizations that do that, like the Literacy Network and Central Hispanic To Go. Does the League of Women Voters of Dane County participate in advocacy work outside of the election? Yes, we do. The league has long taken positions on issues and on the way that's been done. One of the impressive things about the work of the league is that before any position is taken, there's a study by a group of members. Over the years, groups of members would get together and study an issue in detail, and then it would be debated in the organization. It would normally start at the local level and then go to the state, and then it might be moved up to the national organization as well, so there's positions on many, many, many issues. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Offense shines, defense alarms as Badgers take two of three from Michigan State In their first weekend of Big Ten action this season, Wisconsin went 2-1 in East Lansing. By Justin Alpert March 28, 2023 | 2:46pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers (15-9, 2-1) began 2023 conference play this weekend with a pair of wins and a loss at Michigan State (10-14, 1-2). Contributions up and down the lineup fueled an impressive offensive performance and helped Wisconsin overcome some early pitching woes versus the Spartans. Having won 15 of their last 20 games, the Badgers are in full stride just in time for a return home to the Goodman Diamond. Friday | 5-3 W Third baseman Skylar Sirdashney has settled into her new leadoff role in recent weeks and was at the center of the action to open the series, going 2-for-3 with two RBI, two runs, a walk and a stolen base. She squandered a scoring chance in the first inning on a failed attempt to steal home but tried again and succeeded in the third. In her next at-bat, Sirdashney cleared the left field wall with ease, giving Wisconsin a 3-1 lead with her first home run of the season. Rylie Crane added a couple insurance runs with a two-run double that inning, continuing her excellent performance of late with a two-hit game. Wisconsin benefited from a lack of control by Michigan State starter Faith Guidry (L, 2-3), who issued four walks and hit two batters in seven innings. Badger pitching, meanwhile, stayed strong all game, yielding eight hits and no walks in just 82 pitches. Breakout star Gabi Salo started and allowed a run over two innings before giving way to Maddie Schwartz. Apart from a two-run fifth, Schwartz (W, 4-5) impressed in five frames of relief. Taylor Wolfram Friday | 8-3 L Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Schwartz (L, 4-6) failed to carry that momentum into the second half of the doubleheader as the Spartans pieced together a two-out rally in the first inning. Three consecutive hits gave Michigan State a 2-0 lead and made Schwartz’s sixth inning of the day her last. Tessa Magnanimo took over and allowed two runs — one earned — in 1.2 innings. Wisconsin’s third pitcher of the game, Paytn Monticelli, also struggled with four runs — three earned — on five hits over 3.1 frames. The freshman came down to Earth after her otherworldly start to the season — 10 earned runs across her last four appearances have raised Monticelli’s ERA from 1.37 to 2.36, and she’s struck out less than a batter per inning in that span. The Badgers narrowed their deficit to 4-3 with three fourth-inning runs. Kayla Konwent homered and Christaana Angelopulos plated two more runs with a bloop single. Unable to capitalize on later scoring chances, however, Wisconsin suffered its first Big Ten loss of the spring. Sunday | 9-3 W Following the formula from Friday’s first game and many recent contests, the Badgers piggybacked Salo and Schwartz through seven innings. Salo struck out a pair and yielded two hits over three innings. Errors in the second and third resulted in a pair of unearned runs, though, putting Wisconsin in another early hole. The Badgers struck back with four runs in the top of the fifth, which began with a Molly Schlosser leadoff double. Schlosser reached third on an error then scored on another defensive miscue. Katie Keller followed with her second home run as a Badger, a two-run shot which gave Wisconsin a 3-2 lead. A wild pitch and the third Spartan error of the inning allowed Peyton Bannon to score as well. Wisconsin added two runs in the sixth. The next inning, the Badgers scored three times on four doubles — by Konwent, Angelopulos, Brooke Kuffel and Ellie Hubbard. Schwartz (W, 5-6) allowed just one hit across four efficient innings, shutting down Michigan State while Wisconsin piled on the runs. A sloppy Sunday showdown concluded with seven errors between the two teams and a Badger series victory. Taylor Wolfram Cleaning up A third of the 69 runs Wisconsin has allowed this season were unearned thanks to 37 total errors. The left side of the infield has been especially culpable, with Sirdashney and Hubbard tallying nine and eight errors respectively without showing much improvement since early February. Offensively, however, the pair is thriving. Sirdashney has a .417 OBP with nine RBI and even saw time in the cleanup spot this weekend. Hubbard, not expected to contribute a ton at the plate, has managed a .271 average with three doubles and eight walks. Crane, too, has excelled. The freshman’s .325 average through 40 at-bats is earning her middle-of-the-order opportunities. Crane also went 1-for-4 with an RBI and a run as the leadoff hitter in Sunday’s win. The Badgers once again rank near the bottom of the conference in hitting, but this year’s depth is more promising than 2022’s volatile, top-heavy lineup. Sirdashney, Hubbard and Crane have been critical in that development. Much of Wisconsin’s play inspired confidence in Big Ten contention this spring, but winning 15 of 24 games while committing over 1.5 errors per game is unsustainable. The frequency of unearned runs hasn’t been crippling because of Badger pitchers’ overall stinginess. Wisconsin’s four-pronged staff has posted a 1.99 ERA through 161.2 innings — not a small sample size. The group’s 1.05 WHIP is stellar, and thanks to Salo and Monticelli’s emergences, it’s remarkably deep, too. In 2022, only three Badgers — Schwartz, Magnanimo and Ava Justman — threw more than seven total innings. Magnanimo’s currently on pace to finish fourth among Badgers with a substantial 28 innings, while Schwartz, Salo and Monticelli all figure to exceed 70 frames. Evidently, depth is the story across Wisconsin’s roster in 2023. More polished defense, which the Badgers have plenty of time to work on, would make Wisconsin a threat in the postseason. Wisconsin's Tuesday doubleheader versus Green Bay was canceled due to field conditions. Their first home action will be in a weekend series against Illinois and another doubleheader next Tuesday against St. Thomas. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Drake White-Bergey | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Eastern European students willing to give Trump a shot on ending Russo-Ukraine war Eastern European University of Wisconsin-Madison students are open to President-elect Trump’s promises to end Russia’s war in Ukraine. By Peter Fishman December 5, 2024 | 3:00am CST Many Eastern European University of Wisconsin-Madison students who went to the polls for the 2024 election paid close attention to the candidates' foreign policy stances on Russia’s war in Ukraine and came away with a favorite. “Overall, I was more receptive of Trump’s stance [because] I feel that Ukraine, even with arms support, doesn’t have the military capacity to take back more land and risks losing more [in a prolonged war],” said Mikhail, a UW-Madison sophomore originally from Austin, adding this view informed his vote. Mikhail isn’t alone in his reasoning. While some Eastern European UW-Madison students expressed skepticism of Trump’s unpredictability, many students told the Cardinal they were willing to give Trump a chance to bring a quick end to Russia’s war in Ukraine. Trump's pledge to end war attracts student support Since Feb. 24, 2022, when Russian President Vladimir Putin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the war has become a flashpoint in American politics. The incumbent Biden administration has been a staunch defender of Ukraine, spending $106 billion in direct military aid which has helped the beleaguered country reclaim more than half of the territory Russia had taken since 2022. In contrast, Trump has refused to say whether he wants Ukraine to win the war but has said he would end the war during his first day in office. UW-Madison sophomore Georgii Sukhotin, originally from the suburbs of Moscow, didn’t vote in the 2024 election but said he appreciated Trump’s “initiative” in brokering a swift end to the war. “He showed real interest in ending this war and this is what’s most important for me,” Sukhotin said, adding he doubted Ukraine could currently defeat Russia. “I don’t want more deaths, more fighting.” Other students said Trump’s approach to diplomacy appealed to them. UW-Madison junior Yaroslav Polyakov, a Muscovite Jew, said Biden’s aid to Ukraine has been insufficient and “minimal” in bringing an end to the war, while Trump would take decisive action. “He’s not afraid to sit at the same table with dictators like Putin and Kim Jong-Un,” Polyakov said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Trump’s ‘unpredictability’ sparks concern While students said they were open to Trump taking action to end the war, some expressed concern over how Trump would accomplish that. Mikhail said his mom, a Russian-speaking Ukrainian from Kharkiv, disliked Trump’s “unpredictability” and potential he would “discard” Ukraine. A Russian UW-Madison freshman, who requested to remain anonymous, echoed these concerns adding her belief that Trump would force an unequal deal on Ukraine. “Trump will probably push Ukraine to give up the four occupied provinces to Russia in exchange for peace,” she said. However, she said Trump would be a stronger negotiator than Biden. Despite Trump’s pledges to cut aid to Ukraine, Polyakov voiced his belief that the Trump administration wouldn’t cease support. “It’s obvious Trump will continue to support Ukraine in some form even if he claimed he’d stop sending weapons and money,” said Polyakov. Why they voted for Trump For some Eastern Europeans, the Democratic Party’s perceived promotion of “big government” values and support for social movements seemed foreign. UW-Madison junior Andrei Vardanyan, from Armenia, voiced his belief that most Eastern European immigrants voted for Trump due to his outlook on the LGBTQ community. “For those with post-Soviet outlooks, LGBT diversity is alien to them,” Vardanyan said. “Trump’s rhetoric that there are only two genders was more appealing to them, in my opinion.” “While many Democrats are for societal progress by backing movements like BLM, Trans Lives Matter, and so on, many older post-Soviet people don’t understand these movements since promotions of such social issues didn’t exist back in the USSR,” said Mikhail. “As a result, they think Republicans are less radical or more moderate than Democrats.” Regarding pro-Russian or pro-Ukrainian sympathies, Vardanyan also drew comparisons between Eastern European youth in the U.S. and in Armenia. Support for Ukraine is a “generational” issue, Vardanyan said. “The parents are more conservative and pro-Russian while the kids are largely liberal, sometimes even radically liberal, and more pro-western.” Students see a murky future regardless of who’s in office While desires to end the war were clear among all the students the Cardinal interviewed, no one is certain what the results of these peace talks would be and how it would shape the region for years to come. A likely subject held over peace talks would be the status of the five provinces of Crimea, Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhia and Kherson, all occupied by Russian forces. Last year, Ukrainian president Volodymor Zelenskyy said Ukraine had no plans to stop fighting until all of Ukraine’s territories were recaptured. Vardanyan believes peace with Russia would only be temporary before a new war with imperialist aims would erupt. “If Russia wins the war and integrates parts of Ukraine into its territory, it won’t stop. Belarus will be next to fall, then Georgia, then Armenia, and likely the Central Asian countries too.” Sukhotin is among the 650,000 emigres who left Russia in the wake of the mobilization order. Prior to moving to the U.S., he lived in Portugal, a popular destination for Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian expats. He longs for the war to end so that he might return home and be reunited with his family. “I hope everything will return to a state of normalcy at some point.” Sukhotin said. Polyakov expressed a similar sentiment. “I hope this horrible war ends soon,” Polyakov said. “I miss my family, and with the ongoing war, I don’t have a chance to see them.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Wisconsin Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, speaks to reporters after Gov. Tony Evers delivered the 2024 State of the State address in the Wisconsin State Capitol building on Jan. 23, 2024. Photo by Gavin Escott | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Vos reelected Assembly speaker of slimmer Republican majority With a diminished majority, Rep. Robin Vos, R-Rochester, will lead Assembly Republicans into 2025. By Nick Bumgardner November 12, 2024 | 5:34pm CST Assembly Republicans reelected Rep. Robin Vos, R-Rochester, as Assembly speaker Tuesday afternoon, successfully fending off a challenge from Rep. Scott Allen, R-Waukesha. Vos will oversee a slim 54-45 Republican majority in the Assembly next year, down from 64 seats last term. It's the smallest majority under his leadership and the first Legislative term under new legislative maps signed by Gov. Tony Evers earlier this year. Vos declined to release the final vote count, and Allen did not attend Tuesday’s news conference. Assembly Republicans also retained Rep. Tyler August, R-Walworth, as Majority Leader. Vos, the longest serving Assembly speaker in Wisconsin, overcame opposition among others within his party and a turbulent relationship with President-elect Donald Trump. Following the 2020 election, Vos drew criticism within the party for declining to challenge the results or impeach nonpartisan Wisconsin Elections Commission Administrator Meagan Wolfe. In 2022, Vos narrowly beat back a primary challenge from Trump-endorsed Adam Steen, winning by just 260 votes. In 2024, conservative activists launched a recall petition after Vos declined to impeach Wolfe. The effort ultimately fell short, with activists failing to meet the signature requirement to force a recall. Vos was reelected comfortably in the 2024 general election. Earlier this week, Republicans reelected Devin LeMahieu as the Senate Majority Leader. Republicans lost their supermajority in the Senate and now hold a narrow 18-15 majority. Vos laid out his plans for the new term at a news conference Tuesday. He said the Assembly’s “not in a rush” to spend the state’s record surplus. Instead, Republicans will focus on fighting inflation and “putting the money [Wisconsinites] overpaid back in their wallets,” Vos said. On abortion, Vos told reporters he wants a statewide referendum to decide the future of abortion access, and though the issue is “important,” he doesn’t think it was “top of mind” for most voters in 2024. “They were worried about the price of eggs and how am I going to afford rent, and what are we going to do about making sure that we have enough money to be able to buy a new house, things that I think were much more economic faced,” Vos said. Vos also doesn’t think the election results mean Republicans need to govern differently, citing Trump’s win statewide. Instead, Vos said his job is the same as it was before: uniting his party around conservative “consensus.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I'd be curious when you ask the Democrats at the same press conference, what are the areas that you're going to look like you reflect Wisconsin that President Trump carried? Are you going to work with them to cut taxes? Are you going to work with them to reduce regulations? Are you going to find a way to say that we can't afford all the spending that you promised during the campaign?” Vos said. Vos also briefly addressed Wisconsin’s election system, saying it “by and large worked well” in 2024. Newly elected Assistant Majority Leader Rep. Scott Krug, R-Nekoosa, agreed, but he said delays at Milwaukee’s central count location made it “apparent” Republicans “have to do something” about Milwaukee absentee ballot processing. Krug praised Florida’s system, which allows absentee ballots to be processed and counted before Election Day, saying he “hopes to get support to do something similar.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Nick BumgardnerNick Bumgardner is a senior staff writer at The Daily Cardinal covering state news and politics. You can follow him on Twitter at @nickbum_. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal IN-DEPTH Trump drew marginalized voters on the economy, immigration, despite Project 2025 and authoritarianism ties Latinos and women helped drive President-elect Donald Trump’s win despite policy targeting them. These voters told The Daily Cardinal why they opted to choose Trump. By Avery Chheda December 1, 2024 | 2:00am CST President-elect Donald Trump surprised observers by not only winning the electoral college in this year’s presidential election, but also the popular vote — becoming only the second Republican candidate to do so this century. White men, particularly within the working class, made up a massive portion of the Republican vote on Nov. 5, and white women increasingly contributed to help drive Trump’s win. Trump increased his base of support among Latino men, gaining 7% more Latino votes than 2020, when he won 35% of their vote. Trump also prioritized and won the support of young men ages 18-49, gaining over 50% of their votes. Trump’s interview with podcaster Joe Rogan — whose audience is 81% male — just before the election amassed nearly 40 million views in just three days, reaching millions of male voters across the country. In the recent election cycle, traditionally liberal and left leaning demographics shifted red. Trump supporters who are women and part of marginalized groups, impacted by issues including abortion, LGBTQ+ rights and immigration, told The Daily Cardinal how their values aligned with the president-elect. Supports undeterred by claims of authoritarianism, see Project 2025 as false attack Following Trump’s electoral victory, many individuals have labeled Trump an authoritarian. “I would say that there’s some truth to that,” said Doreen, a Wisconsin-based Amazon influencer who voted for Trump. “Being a billionaire business owner, I think [authoritarianism] is a trait in a lot of leadership positions.” Christopher Slinker, a Republican activist and real estate agent, does not consider Trump authoritarian, noting his lack of ability to do what he wants whenever he wants. “He is going to be checked and have balances more so than the normal president because of how visceral the Democrats are about him personally,” Slinker said. Project 2025 is a multi-step project written by over 100 Republicans detailing a four pillar plan to reshape the federal government. President-elect Trump denies any connection to the project, calling certain proposals “absolutely ridiculous and abysmal.” Key contributors to the project remain close confidants of Trump, including Trump’s nominee for the White House Office of Management and Budget Russell Vought and Brendan Carr, who will lead the Federal Communications Commission. Recently, Trump has tapped nearly six Project 2025 authors to his administration as well. But Doreen is not worried about Trump’s cabinet picks despite some of their ties to Project 2025. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I don’t think that we can stay away from some of the people that he picked…[Trump's] priority when he’s choosing [cabinet members] is really loyalty,” Doreen said. Slinker is not concerned by Project 2025, calling it an “excuse” for Democrats to attack Republican candidates. “I have not heard any Republican, including the Trump campaign, including any of our Senate campaigns or Assembly campaigns, even talk about Project 2025, so I think it’s a false attack,” said Slinker. Supporters see Trump as the most qualified candidate In an interview with Rogan ahead of the election, Vice President-elect JD Vance said the campaign would win the “normal gay guy vote.” Slinker, who is gay, said he was unaware of Vance’s comments. While Slinker said he is empathetic towards transgender people and thinks life should be easier for transgender youth, he told the Cardinal “a boy is a boy, a girl is a girl.” “What I don’t support is the government forcing that upon others,” said Slinker. Magaly, a University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman who comes from a family of Latinos who support Trump, thought Trump ran a stronger campaign than Harris because ”he didn’t have all of these celebrities dancing, making the country look like a joke.” Trump rallies included performances from musicians and comedians alike. Magaly said Harris could have won her vote if she hadn’t “pretended to be Black when she’s not,” adding that “she’s Indian." Harris was born to an Indian mother and Jamaican father and has long identified as both Black and South Asian American. Doreen said Harris’ downfall came from her failure to separate herself from President Joe Biden, and the policies she did differentiate from Biden, “she doesn’t even have the authority to grant.” Doreen, a devout Catholic, considers herself a woman of “traditional values.” “I am not somebody that necessarily believes that a woman should be a President of the United States,” Doreen said. “Now there are some exceptions to that, [like] Margaret Thatcher. They called her the Iron Lady for a reason.” Doreen, who believes women “wear their heart on their sleeves,” said they are unfit to run the country because it’s not a “part of their DNA.” On the campaign trail, Doreen said Trump should’ve “regurgitated” the message of his last term rather than “blowing his mouth off and sounding like an idiot.” “Morally, he’s a sinner,” Doreen said. “[But I’m] not electing the man, [I’m] electing the policies.” Doreen said she voted for Trump for a variety of reasons, including her belief he would lead to a “more prosperous” economy, noting increasing grocery prices, and being “100% pro-life.” Trump has previously said he would leave abortion up to individual states, but has declined to endorse a national abortion ban. Doreen said she has “friends who are not married, or not moms,” who share different opinions about abortion, including using phrases like “back the vag.” “For me, just because she’s a woman and has a uterus, doesn’t mean that I’m going to cast my vote for her,” Doreen said. Voters support Trump’s immigration policy Magaly, an Illinois native who voted in Wisconsin, told the Cardinal she values a secure border. “In my neighborhood, there’s these two guys dressed up, going and assaulting people,” Magaly said. Magaly didn’t know their immigration status, but said she believes “you can tell when someone is not from here.” “[You can tell whether someone is legal or illegal] when they’re in the streets, when you see them coming into stores and just looking around and stuff,” Magaly said. Voters view Trump as the right choice for the economy In Milwaukee, the GOP also targeted Black and Latino voters, opening centers on the north and south sides to engage with their communities. Gerard Randall, a Black Milwaukee resident and top Wisconsin GOP official, credited Trump’s increase in Black support to his “full-throated effort” into outreach to African American voters, especially through community outreach centers. Following this election, Randall hopes “people will pay more attention to policy, not personality.” Along with outreach to communities of color, other Wisconsin voters found appeal in Trump’s economic and social policies. “A lot of people like me voted for their wallet,” Randall said. But voters weren’t fully in on Trump’s economic policy. Slinker, who told the Cardinal Trump’s tax cuts weren’t “directed at enough people,” said he hopes Trump changes the criteria for further tax cuts under his second term. “Many hard-working Americans did not benefit from [Trump’s tax cuts],” Slinker said. Doreen also doesn’t think Trump’s policy is perfect. She said Trump is a “big spender” and is concerned with his positions on foreign policy and tariffs. “I’m hoping he gets it under control,” Doreen said. “I just don’t think you can say you’re just gonna tariff everything… It’s gonna blow up in his face if he does that.” Supporters split on heads of new Department of Government Efficiency Billionaire Elon Musk and former GOP presidential candidate Vivek Ramaswamy were named heads of Trump’s new Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE). The department aims to “dismantle Government Bureaucracy, slash excess regulations, cut wasteful expenditures and restructure Federal Agencies.” Doreen is happy Trump is addressing government spending habits, but is weary of Musk’s position as head of the new Department of Government Efficiency, seeing Musk and Trump’s tight-knit relationship as a potential conflict of interest. “With Elon Musk being so close to Trump, is it truly going to be unbiased? I’m not sure about that,” Doreen said. Slinker said Musk and Ramaswamy are “perfectly equipped” to lead DOGE. “As Republicans…we’ve always said the government needs to run more like a business,” Slinker said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo courtesy of Perennial Order via IGDB. ARTS Perennial Order is what you see when you stop and smell the flowers A challenging boss rush meets a strikingly grotesque presentation in Gardenfiend Games’ debut title. By Arin Chandra November 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Perennial Order is Gardenfiend Games’ first venture into game development, mixing a uniquely haunting visual and audio combo with ingenious gameplay decisions to form a marvelous world of plants, beasts and monsters to conquer. Released on Sept. 6 and published by SOEDESCO, Perennial Order creates a challenging experience that takes full advantage of its flawless presentation to envelop the player in the wonders (and horrors) of nature. Natural beauty The game opens with the resurrection of the player character, known only as the Perennial Knight. Immediately, they are tasked with wandering through a bleak and decaying forest, slaying a formidable tree-like creature at the end. This eventful opening segment foreshadows the game’s strongest aspects: its presentation and world building. Throughout the journey, the mood always remains consistently bleak, only matched by the sparse tones of hopefulness in the game’s hub areas, which are populated by non-player characters that both give insight to the state of the world as well as help the knight out with upgrades. The arboreal-infused art style is what makes the presentation top notch. Areas are uniquely characterized through hand-drawn environments and NPCs, ultimately making every place the knight visits a distinct treat for the eyes. From lush jungles filled with life to the foreboding enigma of the abyss, Gardenfiend Games has created a world whose areas feel like walking into paintings. Its art style also contributes to the suspense and horror elements of the experience, especially to the designs of the NPCs and bosses. Everything the player sees in the game is marked with a sense of dread to contribute to the ominous atmosphere, as well as a sense of wonder for the world that came before the events of the game. The art style is not the only star of the show. The original soundtrack captures the desperation behind each hostile encounter as well as the slight flickers of hope that linger in the game’s plant-diseased world. Complementing the foreboding mood Perennial Order maintains, it evokes strong emotions with every new track. A solid narrative helps to give purpose to the masterful presentation of the game. Every boss has some type of story behind them which the knight can discover as they explore and overcome their respective areas. While some explanation for the state of the world is certainly given, there could have been more in terms of what happens to the knight directly to give more weight to the player’s actions and create a more satisfying ending. Aside from the slight misstep in the story, Perennial Order proves to be an exceptionally well-presented experience that keeps the player in a sense of shock throughout its events thanks to its amazing artistic decisions. Thorns in sides Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If Perennial Order is like a painting, then its gameplay is a challenging mix of creating an effective playstyle with the tools at hand and avoiding as many mistakes as possible. It takes only one hit for the knight to fall. However, the game gives them the tools they need to succeed. These include powerful basic charged attacks and holding Wisps, which allows them to either dash to safety or perform various special attacks called Instincts. This allows for the knight to choose between non-stop aggression and precise critical hits. Speaking of precision, Perennial Order demands it from the player at all costs. Each dash is marked with the risk of not being offensive enough to shorten the lengthy boss encounters, and every use of Instincts can prove a fatal error that costs the player time. The delicate balancing act of offense and defense with the limiting Wisp system contributes to the tension and strategy involved with the combat. The game’s difficulty is further pushed forward by the boss battles, which are the main attractions of its combat system. They are incredibly designed within the bounds of the art style and a worthy challenge of the knight’s skills and Instinct combinations. Most importantly, they are fun encounters that encourage various different strategies and setups to overcome. Even though one strategy can work for every boss, there are still many tactics to try out. There is even a boss rush mode that allows players to refight them as many times as they please, encouraging them to push their limits and master every aspect of the combat system. All of this results in a tightly implemented combat system that is pushed to its absolute limit with difficult, creative and fun encounters that encourage players to learn and adapt. Final thoughts Perennial Order proves to be a good omen for Gardenfiend Games and their future in the industry, successfully combining a solid game direction with incredible audio and visual components. The art style is an enthralling take on nature’s unbridled wrath and shows what the developers are capable of. They also manage to make the boss rush aspect an amazing experience, with each fight being a significant development in the player’s story. Even though its narrative leaves something to be desired, Perennial Order is certainly a game worth picking out for the bouquet. Overall rating: 9/10 - Amazing Length: 8-10 hours Perennial Order is out now on Steam, PS5 and XBox Series X. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Liam Beran | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW System updates information security policy The updated University of Wisconsin System policy framework, which went into effect Sunday, establishes categories assessing the importance and risk of UW System data to system schools By Mar McKenna December 2, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin System’s updated policy on data classification went into effect Sunday, establishing a framework for classifying the “sensitivity, value, and criticality” of UW System data to system schools. The policy assesses UW System data using three tiers ranging from lowest to highest risk. These data classifications are “necessary to secure and protect” data, the policy said. The policy, which UW System President Jay Rothman approved on Dec. 1, 2023, is an updated version of a policy issued in 2016. The policy applies to all UW System data, and it allows for individual system schools to develop their own policies if they comply. UW-Madison most recently updated its institutional data policy on Nov. 14, 2023, outlining the requirements for the management of institutional data resources, which the university called a “shared university resource.” The UW-Madison Division for Teaching and Learning also began educating staff on AI and provided public resources regarding AI starting last year, Vice Provost of Learning and Teaching John Zumbrunnen told The Daily Cardinal. “In Summer 2023, we brought together cross-disciplinary teams including faculty, instructional academic staff, academic technologists and student affairs specialists to take stock of the current landscape and develop frameworks, principles, resources and recommendations around generative AI in teaching and learning,” Zumbrunnen said. Current UW-Madison policy limits entering protected data like Wiscard and health information into AI tools without approval, but many decisions on academic AI usage are left up to individual departments and professors. Policy also states instructors should refrain from using AI detection tools, which the policy said are often inaccurate and biased against people whose first language is not English. With these new policies, Zumbrunnen encouraged students to follow instructors’ expectations regarding AI, understand that using AI can share information with the rest of the internet and cite AI if instructors allow its use. Zumbrunnen also encouraged professors to reflect on the benefits and drawbacks of AI and communicate clear expectations with their students. Zumbrunnen believes AI can enhance education, though he cautioned it can be used in a positive and negative way. He compared AI to other forms of technology such as calculators. “Using a calculator may go against our expectations for academic integrity [in some classes], but in other classes or for other assignments, a calculator may be an important learning tool. The same, in a general way, is true of AI,” Zumbrunnen said. He said he was confident the current policy balanced the power of technology and the human mind, though he said students and faculty need to be aware of AI’s limitations. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “All of us — not just students, but all of us — need to be aware of the possibilities and challenges AI brings. This will allow us to engage critically with an information environment in which AI will be an enduring presence,” Zumbrunnen said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mar McKennaMar McKenna is a writer for the Features desk and College News. They are a Philosophy major and a published author. Follow them on Instagram @marmck_writing. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
An adult Emerald Ash Borer. Photo courtesy of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. SCIENCE Researchers remain concerned while an invasive insect kills Wisconsin ash trees Emerald ash borer eats ash trees from the inside out, resulting in 99% mortality for trees in Dane County, according to PJ Liesch, an entomologist for the University of Wisconsin-Madison Extension. By Lindsay Pfeiffer December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST An invasive insect, the emerald ash borer (EAB), continues to kill ash trees across southern Wisconsin, including Dane County, and officials said tree mortality rates have risen. The insect is metallic green and only attacks ash trees. While the adult beetles eat ash leaves, EAB larvae eat the trees’ inner bark, killing them from the inside out. Michael Hillstrom, the invasive forest pest coordinator at the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, told The Daily Cardinal EAB is from east Asia and arrived in the United States in the early 2000s in packing crates. Wisconsin has four types of ash trees: green, white, black and blue, according to PJ Liesch, entomologist for the University of Wisconsin-Madison Extension. Green and white are commonly found in urban and forested areas, while black is found in swampy areas in the north, and blue is exceedingly rare in Wisconsin, he said. Hillstrom said that although EAB hasn’t reached the black ash yet, when it does it’ll be difficult to control. “We’re going to have major issues, where you have large areas that there are no other trees in there other than black ash or very few other trees. So it’s really difficult to access those sites to do anything about it,” he said. Wisconsin has a similar climate to EAB’s native range and is home to plenty of ash trees, making the state a perfect place for EAB to invade, according to Liesch. When EAB first arrived in Wisconsin in 2008, there were around 770 million ash trees in the state. Liesch said this is in part due to the die-off of other species of trees, like elms. When Dutch Elm disease killed off elms, ash trees became the replacement tree in many urban centers such as Milwaukee, he said. Why is EAB so threatening to ash trees? EAB larvae make s-shaped galleries in the water and food-moving tissues of the tree, which blocks the trees from moving nutrients around, Hillstrom said. As more and more larvae eat away the inner bark, the tree starts to die. “Each individual emerald ash borer larva might get up to about an inch long, but it’s death by a thousand paper cuts,” Liesch told the Cardinal. EAB is also incredibly hard to detect in the early stages. Female beetles lay their eggs in the upper branches of the tree, making it hard to detect the presence of EAB until it’s too late, Liesch said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Hillstrom said woodpeckers will eat EAB larvae, especially in the winter, by flicking off pieces of the bark in a process called “flecking.” However, woodpeckers also eat other insects, so officials have to check for other signs of EAB including D-shaped exit holes or S-shaped galleries formed by the larvae. Currently, southern Wisconsin, including Dane County, has approximately a 99% mortality rate, according to Liesch. Mortality rates are highest where EAB has been present the longest, and northern Wisconsin still has lower rates for now, he said. Hillstrom told the Cardinal that in the last few years, mortality rates have increased in Dane County, and the few ash trees left in urban areas are typically being treated for insecticide. “The vast majority of ash [in Dane County] that are not being treated by humans to keep them alive are dead at this point,” he said. How does EAB spread? Both Hillstrom and Liesch agree the biggest factor contributing to the spread of EAB is human activity. The adult beetles can fly but only up to a few miles, according to Hillstrom. The main way EAB is spread is through firewood, which is why it’s important to heat treat, age and buy local wood, he said. “If somebody from Madison’s ash tree dies and they take that wood and move it up to their cabin up north somewhere, the insects can still hatch out of that firewood and start a population in a new area,” Hillstrom said. How can EAB be controlled? Hillstrom said the most important thing to slow the spread of EAB is to create time. This allows cities and forests to respond to the dying trees as they slowly replace ash trees with other species. High-value ash trees, such as ones in residents’ yards, can be treated with insecticide, according to Hillstrom. Additionally, approximately 10,000 ash trees in Madison are treated by the city multiple times a year. Another approach to controlling EAB is biological control, a small silver lining, according to Liesch. Scientists found a small species of wasp that lives in the native range of EAB and only parasitizes EAB, he said. Hillstrom said these wasps don’t sting, and they feed on the larvae of EAB. They are released into forested areas with a lot of ash trees to combat EAB invasions. Researchers spent a lot of time and money to make sure these wasps wouldn’t harm native insects, Hillstrom said. “Those [wasps] can kill 20 to 80% of the larvae in an area, so it’s not something that’s going to get rid of emerald ash borer, but it’s another piece of that puzzle of knocking the population back, so it doesn’t spread as fast, and those trees have a chance to get bigger and produce seed,” Hillstrom said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of A24 ARTS ‘I Saw the TV Glow’ is a mesmerizing watch Director Jane Schoenbrun invites viewers into a strange, unsettlingly familiar world in their new film. By Jackson Wyatt May 12, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Eight years after vanishing without a trace, a girl reappears in the aisle of a local grocery store. When desperately questioned by a friend about where she went, she only has one response: “Do you remember a TV show we used to watch together?” Rather than being consumed, media is all-consuming in director Jane Schoenbrun’s sophomore feature “I Saw the TV Glow.” The film follows the debilitatingly shy Owen (Justice Smith) and the deeply troubled Maddy (Brigette Lundy-Paine), two high school outcasts who cultivate a friendship through binge-viewings of a cult-classic television show. This show is “The Pink Opaque” — think “Buffy the Vampire Slayer” meets “Goosebumps.” Then “The Pink Opaque” is canceled, Maddy disappears and Owen is left to sort through the pieces, and “I Saw the TV Glow” switches channels from its off-kilter, coming-of-age premise to an interdimensional, psychological horror. Schoenbrun is in familiar territory. Their feature debut “We Are All Going to the World’s Fair,” a suffocating found-footage horror for the chronically online, similarly examined how reality can blur when young people are pulled into the tractor beam of media. Unlike the slow simmer of “World’s Fair,” though, “I Saw the TV Glow” quickly descends into a vibrant, full-tilt nightmare. As the fictional realm of ‘The Pink Opaque’ begins to ooze into Owen’s everyday life, Schoenbrun introduces us to a world where every television can become a portal, every suburban block crawls with monsters and every chalk drawing on the sidewalk is a message from the other side. Smith’s performance as Owen is largely the film’s emotional buoy. The 28-year-old actor wears adolescent awkwardness with impressive ease, his gawky mannerisms and warbly voice all conveying a sense of arrested development. In contrast, Lundy-Paine’s performance as Maddy is wonderfully bizarre, their slack-jawed demeanor and deadpan delivery imbuing the role with the sensibilities of a “Napoleon Dynamite” character. The cast of “I Saw the TV Glow” is small but mighty, and Schoenbrun gives their two lead actors ample room to deliver complex, commanding performances. The film’s atmosphere is so thick at times it almost feels tactile, largely thanks to Eric Yue’s gauzy, dreamy cinematography. While most indie horror is spiny, “I Saw the TV Glow” is gooey, a sickly sweet visual taffy. Shoenbrun’s existential horrors don’t leap out of the darkness, bearing fangs. They linger, slowly eating through the film like moth holes in a blanket. In its quieter moments of characters clinging to the comfort of childhood nostalgia, going as far as to literally crawl into the television, “I Saw the TV Glow” is so much more than scary; it’s haunting. Some elements inevitably feel less convincing than others. While the familial dysfunction of the film’s young characters is a necessary context to explain their vulnerability, this dysfunction is touched on so briefly that it never holds much narrative weight. Justice Smith’s performance is cumulatively impressive, but the devolution of his character into strained screaming and wheezing by the film’s end feels a bit too absurd. Still, “I Saw the TV Glow” undeniably sticks the landing, an emotionally disarming and tenderly realized film that begs the question: If television is an escape, then is the real world a prison? Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email In collaboration with the Wisconsin Film Festival, the Wisconsin Union Directorate (WUD) Art Committee held an advanced showing of the film on Apr. 2 at The Marquee. “I Saw the TV Glow” releases on May 3. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Jackson WyattJackson Wyatt is a former copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
A meeting with administration ended with UW-Madison police officers removing 16 graduate students from Bascom Hall after the building closed in April 2019. Photo by Claire Grummon | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research Editor’s note: Letters to the Editor and open letters reflect the opinions, concerns and views of University of Wisconsin-Madison students and community. As such, the information presented may or may not be accurate. Letters to the Editor and open lette By Madeline Topf, co-president of the Teaching Assistants’ Association November 21, 2024 | 1:18pm CST Editor’s note: Letters to the Editor and open letters reflect the opinions, concerns and views of University of Wisconsin-Madison students and community. As such, the information presented may or may not be accurate. Letters to the Editor and open letters do not reflect the editorial views or opinions of The Daily Cardinal. Graduate students constantly inspire me with their dedication and passion. Whether for a subject area, a scientific question, or a career goal, graduate students will persevere to find the answer, finish the experiment, and finish their degree. They will weather whatever storm. I am a co-president of my graduate student labor union, the Teaching Assistants’ Association. We represent Teaching Assistants (graduate workers who teach classes, grade papers, lead discussion sections) and Research Assistants (graduate workers who do research, often in a laboratory setting) and all other graduate workers. As elected co-president of the labor union representing TAs and RAs, it is my duty to lead the fight for the conditions that allow us to do what we love while leading lives with dignity. We must protect each other from the exploitation of our dedication, we must, at some point, say “no” while we are so used to saying yes. Especially as graduate programs, including programs in the Biosciences, require more and more unpaid labor. Graduate students in Microbiology, iPiB, Genetics, Plant Pathology, and BME have previously or are currently expected to assistant teach, or TA, without pay. This requirement comes on top of the Research Assistantship we have; it comes on top of an already full-time job. Unfortunately, research expectations are not explicitly lowered during the semester(s) of unpaid labor requirement, causing undue stress to keep projects going. “I knew students who had more TA work than me […] and they were suffering,” a Biosciences Ph.D. student wrote in response to a union survey. We are not trained in any of the duties for the TAship; we are not trained how to grade, how to interact with undergraduate students, how to proctor exams, how to answer questions, or how to hold meaningful discussion. It is a real missed opportunity for us, and it’s unfair to our students. The distribution of difficulty and workload for each TA class is random, you may have hours of work a day, or minutes; you may need to learn a new subject altogether. Students studying bacterial evolution may be required to TA Immunology. Students studying virology get placed in Bioinformatics 563. We are not given any anti-harassment or DEI training before we step into the classroom. “I also was not able to get any research done when I had to TA a lab course because of how demanding it was,” another Biosciences graduate worker said. Not getting any research done is heartbreaking for those of us who are dedicating our lives to research, we cannot do what we love. It is all the more stressful because we’re evaluated on our research progress during our preliminary exam, where failure of the exam causes dismissal from the degree program. We are told our unpaid TA requirement is professional development. But one of the unpaid roles this year was actually paid last year, and most of us do not want to go into teaching. I am corrected when I say “TA” to the term “TP,” or “Teaching Practicum.” The Graduate School’s programs in Plant Pathology, BME, and Microbiology have made the unpaid TA requirement into a course that students would get assessed on as part of our preliminary exam. This impending change has caused anxiety, fear that we could be dismissed for teaching poorly, after receiving no teaching guidance or support. I believe a TA “course” is an attempt to disguise the requirement’s unpaid labor, but it also serves to separate us scientists away from our colleagues in other disciplines who TA to support themselves. A labor union is supposed to fight for its members. It is supposed to gather everyone in, and push, together, for raises (like the historic ones we’ve won in the Biosciences), better workplace policies (like the paid leave policy we won), and respect. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Graduate workers get compensated for their labor as TAs and as RAs. That has been the deal, that is why we have a union. How are we, as a labor union representing TAs, supposed to advocate for increased TA wages in Chemistry when somebody in Biochemistry is forced to do the work for free? So, as the union, we have written and are circulating a letter. bit.ly/bio-letter. We have over 200 signatures, are building majorities and notable endorsements; please sign it. We want the elimination of unpaid TA requirements, to instead have TA work compensated and optional, like it should be. We have asked the Chancellor to meet with us to discuss this and other issues of concern to graduate workers, who keep the University running. But she said no. She will not take time out of her day to hear from us, what I believe would be a sign of respect to those of us dedicating our creativity, passions, talents, and careers to UW-Madison. All we want is to be able to do the work we fell in love with, and, one day, be appreciated. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Underly's budget proposal is a bold step toward strengthening Wisconsin's public education
Kaur's collection of poetry has the capacity to mend and heal broken hearts. Photo by Image courtesy of Bustle | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Rupi Kaur’s 'the sun and her flowers' is a recipe for life By Lauren Souza October 1, 2018 | 8:00am CDT In light of Rupi Kaur’s appearance at UW-Madison, I thought this was the perfect time to explore her newest collection, “the sun and her flowers.” An opportunity to dive into the world of poetry was not going to be passed up. Her debut collection “milk and honey” liberated poetry from the archaism of convoluted subjects and strict meter. The fluidity of her style transforms the metaphors that encapsulate the struggle of life. After self-publishing “milk and honey,” Kaur signed a two-book deal with publishing company Simon and Schuster. The long-awaited pseudo-sequel came Oct. 3, 2017. It is designed to be a more grown-up version that dives deeper into the complexity of human emotion. “the sun and her flowers” touches on the various forms of love: “A vibrant and transcendent journey about growth and healing. Ancestry and honoring one’s roots. Expatriation and rising up to find a home within yourself.” The themes center around love and loss, trauma and abuse, healing, femininity and the body. Certain topics of female infanticide, immigration and borders bring about the realization for Kaur’s mission: equality and love for all genders, races and backgrounds. The origination for this titular collection arose from Kaur’s thought process on a difficult breakup. She disclosed, “We are all our own suns and flowers are the experiences and the people we got through in our entire lifetime, so the sun and her flowers.” The stylization is similar to “milk and honey” by reflection of Kaur’s culture. This is done through the inclusion of Gurmukhi script, the use of only lower-case letters. She purposefully abstains from traditional punctuation to powerfully affirm each line. There are a combination of short poems with longer narratives when recounting issues such as her parents’ broken English and its beauty or self-reclamation after sexual abuse. Her poems often lack titles and distinct boundaries between each piece; they can either be read as sequences or individually. The fluidity is an organic creation of poetry that is distinct from the formal constraints of the genre. Originally, “the sun and her flowers” was intended to be a collection detailing the intricacies of unhealthy relationships and how toxic love distorts our view of the world. Due to the recent climate, Kaur was pulled to write about the political implications of diaspora and immigration. There is an evident shift from the repetition of love poems and healing shown in “milk and honey” to a distressed commentary on racial issues. "Each section focuses on one thematic aspect that overarches the main message: a celebration of love in all its forms." The book is split into five sections, designed to reflect the life cycle of flowers: “wilting,” “falling,” “rooting,” “rising” and “blooming.” Each section focuses on one thematic aspect that overarches the main message: a celebration of love in all its forms. Similar to the last collection, there are sketches and illustrations that are relevant to each flower cycle. The first section, “wilting,” touches on the pervading distress of lost love and the struggle of waking up in bed alone. This is not simply lamentation of a breakup, but the affirmation of needing self-love. It demonstrates the early stages of a breakup and people getting in touch with their new selves. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email In the poem “what love looks like,” she questions the definition of love and our unhealthy obsession with solely romantic affection. This is not a pitiful sob story but rather a candid expression of what it should be like. She writes, “i think love starts here/ everything else is just desire and projection.” Love is an act of giving: the love of selflessly hard-working parents or the fading love of a distant friend. The arduous journey toward self-acceptance is not simplified or watered down, and the struggles of depression are disturbingly depicted. For example, “what draws you to her/ tell me what you like/ so I can practice” exposes a self-flagellating psyche. However, it’s crucial to note there is a defiant refusal to find validation in a lover’s approval. The next section, “falling,” is the downfall of the first part with the overwhelming emotions of loneliness and sorrow. The focus is around the depressive feelings after a loss of an important relationship — that dark cloud which feels heavy. The poem “depression is a shadow living in me” shows the evocation of dejection and utter hopelessness. It demonstrates the vivid imagery of a person trapped within their own thoughts. “rooting” is the third section and shows a shift in its exploration of topics like female infanticide and immigration. This is the process of regaining strength and self-worth in life. The contemplation of life at its fullest and rumination. The soul is able to re-energize and begin again. "it is a blessing/ to be the colour of the earth." —Rupi Kaur Rather than homogenize these experiences into collective trauma, Kaur focuses on the intimate moments of her mother’s longing for her native Punjab. This nuanced exploration of faces is shown through her guilt about her parents’ sacrifices and the desire to understand their cultural history, to have “pried their silence apart like a closed envelope.” This is not just grief, but a fierce pride of racial identity: “it is a blessing/ to be the colour of the earth.” There is a demand for more representation in literature which is emphasized by her unapologetic poetic style that takes up space: “to be mouthy/ get as loud as we need/ to be heard.” The fourth cycle is entitled “rising.” This is the transition into a more positive note after the sensation of being at rock bottom. It’s taking action and ascending from the lowest level. She notes this in the section’s first poem, “on the first day of love/ you wrapped me in the word special.” There is still love out there. Kaur’s poem “celebration” illustrates nature’s creatures struggling through the blossoming process. There is an expression of hesitation to continue their lives. This hesitation connects with every person who has at one time in their life refused to turn the page and move on. In order to grow, people must leave behind the toxicity. "You are able to realize that you do not need another person to be whole anymore. There is a recognition of self-worth and a lesson to love what matters most: yourself." The collection ends on a note of pure hopefulness in “blooming.” This is the moment when the flower reaches full form and is able to stand alone. You are able to realize that you do not need another person to be whole anymore. There is a recognition of self-worth and a lesson to love what matters most: yourself. Her first poem reads: “the universe took its time on you/ crafted you to offer the world/ something different from everyone else/ when you doubt/ how you were created/ you doubt an energy greater than us both — irreplaceable.” That last word truly resonates with you, because it is crucial to go through each cycle to get to where you are now. The blooming is the epitome of why you are here. You are worth it. This is the reward after all the pain and trauma. Through the use of nature, Kaur expresses beauty and life by creating a sense of community in life’s inevitable pain. This collection of poetry has the capacity to mend and heal broken hearts. It proves the cliché that there is a light at the end of the tunnel by giving us hope when there seems to be none. There is a significant departure from Kaur’s reputation as a mere Tumblr Girl to a voice of social justice. She is unafraid to speak her mind about taboo subjects and shows the unique power that her poems can hold. Brevity is the soul of Instapoetry, as seen in her ability to condense our world into a short poem. Her words give a sense of relief by giving validation that pain is not a unique experience but something which is extremely relatable. “the sun and her flowers” is candid, beautiful and succeeds in snagging the hearts of every reader. Kaur proves that feelings matter, and she understands the value of the human heart and the respect that a living, breathing, creating person deserves. The voice of her poetry provides a path of healing. I encourage everyone to take time out of their day to give Rupi Kaur’s newest collection more than a cursory glance — I guarantee it will be worth it. It’s the recipe of life. Final Grade: A Lauren Souza is the Daily Cardinal's literature columnist. To read more of her work, which includes a review of Rupi Kaur's "milk and honey," click here. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
OLYMPUS DIGITAL CAMERA ARTS How Barbenheimer came to the Marquee Cinema Almost 1,000 people showed up to WUD Film’s screening of Barbenheimer. Here’s how it all came together. By Tomer Ronen December 16, 2023 | 2:00am CST Barbenheimer, back-to-back screenings of “Barbie” and “Oppenheimer,” shook the film industry to its core, surpassing expectations and breaking records. About five months later, almost 1,000 people lined up to watch the duo at the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s Marquee Cinema. “It was a big cultural thing,” said junior Ilya Johnson, the Experimental, International & Cult Programmer at the Wisconsin Union Directorate’s Film Committee. “We wanted to bring it to campus.” Barbenheimer is not the first time two summer blockbuster films have competed on the same weekend. But after grossing just shy of $1 billion domestically and $2.4 billion worldwide, it’s safe to say the clash between Greta Gerwig’s “Barbie” and Christopher Nolan’s “Oppenheimer” was the most successful summer showdown since the faceoff between “Ghostbusters” and “Gremlins” in June 1984. Some even speculated Barbenheimer “saved the summer box office” as the film industry recovered from COVID-19. The process of bringing Barbenheimer to Union South began very quickly, said sophomore Emma Weishaar, WUD Film’s Contemporary & Repertory Mainstream Programmer. The associate director team knew Barbenheimer had to happen. “We knew that college students would love this, and we needed to bring it to the Marquee,” Weishaar said. Weishaar was right. Barbenheimer was WUD Film’s biggest weekly movie screening of the semester, in part due to marketing. Johnson said WUD Film ramped up their outreach efforts because they knew it would be such a big draw, and they added an extra showing in anticipation of a large turnout. “People had been asking for months,” Weishaar said. “It is primarily for students, but people in the Madison area often come to our screenings too, and even people that aren’t students were like, ‘Hey when is Barbenheimer happening?’” With finals for students right around the corner, WUD Film thought the second weekend of December would be the perfect time to show Barbenheimer. With the continued in-theater extension of both films, obtaining rights to show them proved to be a challenge for WUD Film. WUD cannot show films while they are still in cinemas because the Marquee is a non-theatrical theater. “We were watching the availability, so every day one of us would log in and check. It was like, ‘When can we get it! when can we get it!’” Weishaar said. “Once they were done, it was pretty much ‘let’s get this going.’” Typically, it takes about two to three weeks for WUD Film to get a movie from the inbox to the theater. Junior Miles Foster, WUD Film’s Alternative & Independent Programmer, told The Daily Cardinal they thought “Oppenheimer” would take a little bit longer because they thought it would take extra time to secure the rights. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Ultimately, the timeline was about the same as any other film, Weishaar said. “It’s probably one of our biggest campus cinematic events of the year,” Foster said. “There’s so many cool things that can be done with it.” The 500 viewers who attended “Barbie” and 430 who came for “Oppenheimer” competed in a costume competition. WUD Film awarded winners a movie-theater quality poster for the film of their choice. Not wearing pink to “Barbie” feels borderline disrespectful, dressing up as Robert Oppenheimer takes commitment. “It’s a really cool weekend because both these movies are really something for everyone and each of them together amplifies it,” Foster said. “I like that it took on this form of ‘let’s hype up both of these movies.” WUD Film also ran Lagueria Davis’ documentary “Black Barbie” on Thursday, which shows the increasing need for inclusivity in Barbie dolls. In addition to running the documentary, Friday’s showing included open captions to make the film more accessible. “We’re here for you. Whatever you need from us that we can provide: captions, other ADA regulations, we will provide that for you,” Foster said. As far as crossovers go, Barbenheimer will be hard to replicate. Paramount Pictures tried to push “Saw Patrol” — a crossover between “Saw X” and “PAW Patrol: The Mighty Movie” — with little success. The duo only brought in about $41 million combined in its opening weekend. “I think what made [Barbenheimer] work was it felt like this trend was created by the people for the people and not so much a corporate ploy for attention,” Foster said. Perhaps “The Garfield Movie” will find its perfect match in “Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes.” in May 2024. One thing is for certain: WUD Film will host a showing of “The Room” and “Black Swan” the last weekend in January, free at the Marquee. You can call it “just another weekend” for them. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of NIAID/Flickr The mpox virus (orange) in an infected cell (green) taken at the NIAID Integrative Research Facility in Fort Detrick, Maryland. SCIENCE WHO declares mpox international public health emergency, Wisconsin remains low in risk A new and contagious strain of mpox has made its way out of Central Africa, but the CDC considers the risk of the strain to be low in the United States for now. By Sonia Bendre and Lindsay Pfeiffer September 5, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The World Health Organization Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus declared mpox a public health emergency of international concern on Aug. 14 following the uptick in cases in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the spread of the virus across surrounding African countries. On Aug. 15, the public health agency of Sweden confirmed that strain Clade Ib of mpox reached outside of Africa to Sweden, where a traveler picked up the virus after visiting one of the countries affected by mpox. Since then, cases have been reported in Thailand and the Philippines, according to the New York Times. At the moment, the risk to Wisconsin and the general U.S. public is very low, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. What is mpox? Mpox, previously called monkeypox, is a virus similar to smallpox, though less severe and less contagious. There are two different strains of the virus, and the current strain is mostly caused by Clade Ib, a mutant of Clade I, according to the WHO. Typically endemic to central Africa, Clade Ib is more severe and more deadly than the genetically distinct strain that caused an outbreak in 2022, Clade II. “Whether the mortality or death rate would be similar in DRC versus somewhere else like the U.S. is unknown. But, obviously, we have to be hesitant upfront and watch very closely because it does have this increased mortality compared to the other version,” Dan Shirley, an infectious disease physician and medical director for infection prevention at UW Health, told The Daily Cardinal. Were the virus to spread, the mortality rate is expected to be lower in the U.S. than in the DRC. Unlike in the DRC, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has already approved use of two vaccines against mpox. The fatality rate for Clade Ib is around 10% in children and five percent in adults, compared to a fatality rate of one percent or lower in both populations for Clade II. The virus is also more deadly for those with comorbidities such as HIV. The virus is zoonotic — transmittable from animals to humans — and was discovered in 1958 in a monkey, though monkeys are not the infection source. It was first discovered in humans in the DRC in 1970. It belongs to the Orthopox family, along with 12 other DNA viruses. The family includes smallpox. “[Orthopox] is a group of viruses that all cause a pox disease, pustules that are on your skin,” Emma Mohr, an assistant professor in the Department of Pediatrics, told the Cardinal. Mohr’s research focuses on the transmission of Clade IIb mpox from mother to fetus during pregnancy. Mpox can also be spread person-to-person via physical contact, and Clade Ib can be transmitted sexually and through contaminated objects, as well as to a fetus through an infected mother. Those affected can experience a variety of symptoms, including swollen lymph nodes, fever and, most notably, skin lesions, which generally take weeks to heal. “The skin lesions can be all over your body, including in your mouth and down by your bottom, and can impact your ability to swallow liquids, keep liquids down and stay hydrated. Sometimes the infection is so severe that it infects the lungs and infects the brain, and that's why people die,” said Mohr. This outbreak comes on the heels of a 2022 outbreak of the Clade II strain of the virus, which affected 95,000 people across 115 countries, and over 32,000 in the U.S. alone, including 97 in Wisconsin, according to the CDC. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Both Mohr and Shirley agreed there will likely be cases of Clade Ib in the U.S. Whereas the previous outbreak affected primarily sexually active gay and bisexual men, the new outbreak primarily affects children. Around 70% of the now over 20,000 cases in DRC are in children under 15, and case numbers are likely underreported due to limitations in contact tracing, testing and surveillance, according to the WHO. More than 95% of all cases of the new strain originate from DRC, although the virus has affected 13 countries in total, according to the New York Times. So far, 975 deaths have been reported in DRC alone. Besides vaccines, social distancing can slow the disease’s spread. But some places in DRC, particularly displacement camps, are so crowded that they make distancing difficult or impossible. “I hope that the global community is able to help intervene now that the WHO has called it a public health emergency of international concern and really help to get medical care and vaccines to these impacted populations in the civil unrest in that area,” said Mohr. Recently, the WHO Director-General initiated the process for Emergency Use Listing of mpox vaccines. This listing allows companies to submit vaccines for approval and distribution by partners such as Gavi and UNICEF. Although the Emergency Use Listing of the vaccine has been initiated, it has not yet been approved, and the WHO has not officially approved the two available vaccines for use. This complicates the process for vaccines to be transported into DRC — it is estimated that around 10 million vaccines will be needed to quell the virus. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
The Aurora Borealis photographed on the night of October 9 from The Lakeshore Preservation path. Photo by Humza Pasha | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Northern lights illuminate Madison sky UW-Madison caught a rare viewing of the aurora borealis on Oct. 9 and 10. By Eiman Mir October 15, 2024 | 7:25pm CDT Madison witnessed a sightseeing northern light show on Oct. 9 and 10. The northern lights, or aurora borealis, are typically only visible near the polar regions. However, extreme solar activity can extend the viewing range south. While it is typical for only northern Wisconsin to see the lights, this year, the Madison area received a glimpse of the show as well. This year brings more solar activity since this year marks a time of peak activity in the sun’s 11-year cycle, bringing increases in electromagnetic activity. This can lead to solar flares, which NASA defines as an “intense burst of radiation coming from the release of magnetic energy associated with sunspots.” An increase in sunspots can lead to more coronal mass ejections, which are large eruptions of magnetized solar plasma. When directed toward the Earth's surface, the interaction between these energized particles and atmospheric gasses leads to the aurora borealis. Different gasses produce different colors. Last week, the northern lights were best seen on Thursday and Friday. Crowds gathered around Memorial Union, Observatory Hill and other spots on campus to capture photos of the view. Seeing the northern lights is difficult with the naked eye, but cameras are able to better capture the colors. Photos with a longer exposure time will be able to pick up the colors best. Opportunities to view aurora borealis are expected to come up throughout the 2024-25 winter season. The Space Weather Prediction Center updates their aurora borealis viewing prediction tool daily. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Offense shines, defense alarms as Badgers take two of three from Michigan State In their first weekend of Big Ten action this season, Wisconsin went 2-1 in East Lansing. By Justin Alpert March 28, 2023 | 2:46pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers (15-9, 2-1) began 2023 conference play this weekend with a pair of wins and a loss at Michigan State (10-14, 1-2). Contributions up and down the lineup fueled an impressive offensive performance and helped Wisconsin overcome some early pitching woes versus the Spartans. Having won 15 of their last 20 games, the Badgers are in full stride just in time for a return home to the Goodman Diamond. Friday | 5-3 W Third baseman Skylar Sirdashney has settled into her new leadoff role in recent weeks and was at the center of the action to open the series, going 2-for-3 with two RBI, two runs, a walk and a stolen base. She squandered a scoring chance in the first inning on a failed attempt to steal home but tried again and succeeded in the third. In her next at-bat, Sirdashney cleared the left field wall with ease, giving Wisconsin a 3-1 lead with her first home run of the season. Rylie Crane added a couple insurance runs with a two-run double that inning, continuing her excellent performance of late with a two-hit game. Wisconsin benefited from a lack of control by Michigan State starter Faith Guidry (L, 2-3), who issued four walks and hit two batters in seven innings. Badger pitching, meanwhile, stayed strong all game, yielding eight hits and no walks in just 82 pitches. Breakout star Gabi Salo started and allowed a run over two innings before giving way to Maddie Schwartz. Apart from a two-run fifth, Schwartz (W, 4-5) impressed in five frames of relief. Taylor Wolfram Friday | 8-3 L Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Schwartz (L, 4-6) failed to carry that momentum into the second half of the doubleheader as the Spartans pieced together a two-out rally in the first inning. Three consecutive hits gave Michigan State a 2-0 lead and made Schwartz’s sixth inning of the day her last. Tessa Magnanimo took over and allowed two runs — one earned — in 1.2 innings. Wisconsin’s third pitcher of the game, Paytn Monticelli, also struggled with four runs — three earned — on five hits over 3.1 frames. The freshman came down to Earth after her otherworldly start to the season — 10 earned runs across her last four appearances have raised Monticelli’s ERA from 1.37 to 2.36, and she’s struck out less than a batter per inning in that span. The Badgers narrowed their deficit to 4-3 with three fourth-inning runs. Kayla Konwent homered and Christaana Angelopulos plated two more runs with a bloop single. Unable to capitalize on later scoring chances, however, Wisconsin suffered its first Big Ten loss of the spring. Sunday | 9-3 W Following the formula from Friday’s first game and many recent contests, the Badgers piggybacked Salo and Schwartz through seven innings. Salo struck out a pair and yielded two hits over three innings. Errors in the second and third resulted in a pair of unearned runs, though, putting Wisconsin in another early hole. The Badgers struck back with four runs in the top of the fifth, which began with a Molly Schlosser leadoff double. Schlosser reached third on an error then scored on another defensive miscue. Katie Keller followed with her second home run as a Badger, a two-run shot which gave Wisconsin a 3-2 lead. A wild pitch and the third Spartan error of the inning allowed Peyton Bannon to score as well. Wisconsin added two runs in the sixth. The next inning, the Badgers scored three times on four doubles — by Konwent, Angelopulos, Brooke Kuffel and Ellie Hubbard. Schwartz (W, 5-6) allowed just one hit across four efficient innings, shutting down Michigan State while Wisconsin piled on the runs. A sloppy Sunday showdown concluded with seven errors between the two teams and a Badger series victory. Taylor Wolfram Cleaning up A third of the 69 runs Wisconsin has allowed this season were unearned thanks to 37 total errors. The left side of the infield has been especially culpable, with Sirdashney and Hubbard tallying nine and eight errors respectively without showing much improvement since early February. Offensively, however, the pair is thriving. Sirdashney has a .417 OBP with nine RBI and even saw time in the cleanup spot this weekend. Hubbard, not expected to contribute a ton at the plate, has managed a .271 average with three doubles and eight walks. Crane, too, has excelled. The freshman’s .325 average through 40 at-bats is earning her middle-of-the-order opportunities. Crane also went 1-for-4 with an RBI and a run as the leadoff hitter in Sunday’s win. The Badgers once again rank near the bottom of the conference in hitting, but this year’s depth is more promising than 2022’s volatile, top-heavy lineup. Sirdashney, Hubbard and Crane have been critical in that development. Much of Wisconsin’s play inspired confidence in Big Ten contention this spring, but winning 15 of 24 games while committing over 1.5 errors per game is unsustainable. The frequency of unearned runs hasn’t been crippling because of Badger pitchers’ overall stinginess. Wisconsin’s four-pronged staff has posted a 1.99 ERA through 161.2 innings — not a small sample size. The group’s 1.05 WHIP is stellar, and thanks to Salo and Monticelli’s emergences, it’s remarkably deep, too. In 2022, only three Badgers — Schwartz, Magnanimo and Ava Justman — threw more than seven total innings. Magnanimo’s currently on pace to finish fourth among Badgers with a substantial 28 innings, while Schwartz, Salo and Monticelli all figure to exceed 70 frames. Evidently, depth is the story across Wisconsin’s roster in 2023. More polished defense, which the Badgers have plenty of time to work on, would make Wisconsin a threat in the postseason. Wisconsin's Tuesday doubleheader versus Green Bay was canceled due to field conditions. Their first home action will be in a weekend series against Illinois and another doubleheader next Tuesday against St. Thomas. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Courtesy of A24 ARTS ‘The Zone of Interest’ highlights the horrifying banality of evil Director Jonathan Glazer’s new film shows a horrifying, underlooked side of the Holocaust. By Joseph Panzer February 4, 2024 | 12:29pm CST Content warning: “The Zone of Interest” contains graphic scenes of the Holocaust during World War II. Reader discretion is advised. Playing to a packed house at the UW Cinematheque Thursday night, director Jonathan Glazer’s “The Zone of Interest” — about Auschwitz commandant Rudolf Höss and his wife, Hedwig, trying to build a dream life for their family next to the camp — is a harrowing and prescient film because of what is left out of the frame. The film begins with a black screen accompanied by a faint chorus of screams, preparing the audience for the central caveat of the film: we do not see the victims of the camp suffer, we only barely hear their cries. Instead of focusing on the victims of the Holocaust, we as viewers are asked to connect with the Höss family in order to confront ourselves and how we can become perpetrators of evil when we stand to gain from it. The only thing we see of Auschwitz itself is the wall separating the garden of the Höss home from the complex and the watchtower looming over the concentration camp, a reminder of the inhumanity happening next door. By focusing on the domestic life of Höss, we see how evil often presents itself as utterly banal. Rudolf goes about his job while Hedwig tends to the children just as though he worked in an office instead of a concentration camp. We hear screams and gunfire, but we only see the Höss’ children at play reenacting the violent scenes they overhear while wearing Hitler Youth uniforms. Portraying Höss as a family man instead of a monster conveys how he was not a schemer focused on racial views, but a man who ignored his own evil in hopes of rising the Nazi ranks. By going along with what he has been told to do and chasing after promotions in the bureaucracy of the SS, Höss becomes responsible for history’s most infamous genocide. The cinematography, emphasizing static shots and placement of the camera away from the actors in the frame, separates viewers from Höss, creating a documentary feeling that emphasizes the sterile nature of his job. The use of hallways as framing devices directing the eye to the action further communicates how genocide becomes routine — for him — by constantly placing us in an austere and cramped environment, showing the rigid bureaucracy with which the Holocaust was conducted. The camera only moves when Hedwig displays her garden, which also doubles as a way for the camera to pan over the imposing structures of Auschwitz in the background. Even when we are free from cold interiors, the specter of death is always present, never allowing the audience a moment of reprieve from the horror. Above all, “The Zone of Interest” reminds us of the fact that we as human beings are all capable of committing unspeakable cruelties and that it is our moral responsibility to acknowledge our shared humanity to avoid repeating the past. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal News Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS Fuck UHS, go raw milk, go Ozempic, vote me for ASM. By Peter Pricket December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Fuck it. This campus has spent enough time pretending to know what the Associated Students of Madison is or what it does. Naturally, my only logical conclusion is to run for president of ASM. While Trump has Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy to run their new Department of Government Efficiency, I, Peter Pricket, am going to what the University of Wisconsin-Madison needs the most: become an Elon Musk figure and cut this place to the bone. My flop ass friend Libby Demi can be Vivek. I promise to slash excess regulations and cut wasteful expenditures, including University Health Services, by 50%. Here’s why: UHS doesn’t do shit. Who needs vaccines, testing for anything, therapy or whatever else when you can rely on more natural medicines like raw milk, Ozempic, yoga and essential oils. The Europeans pay less for health care than we do in America, and even then, students pay more for UHS than their average health care in-state, so let’s maybe just slash the whole thing and see what happpens. Truthfully, we need to build up immune systems anyway. If you need Emergen-C or cough medicine, you need to work for it. Survival of the fittest is the basis of life and a long forgotten practice I will revive. And you know what’s better than therapy? A subscription to betterhelp.com or ChatGPT. And, as someone who likes my rose quartz and jade, if you hold it close to you and breathe deeply, it’s basically like taking an SSRI. If you disagree with me on any of this, I am choosing a more efficient route of communication than in-person meetings. Please contact me on my X Space and we can schedule a time. Vote Peter Pricket for ASM. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter New York is for the rats
The club has meetings every Wednesday at 6:30 p.m. in Room 131 of the Teacher Education Building. Photo by Brandon Arbuckle | The Daily Cardinal ARTS UW’s Game Design and Development club gives students a place to play, create, share By Brandon Arbuckle June 12, 2018 | 8:00am CDT The city of Madison is home to many successful video game studios. Raven Software has helped develop entries in the “Call of Duty” series, while PerBlue signed a deal with Disney to make mobile games for the media juggernaut. For those who aspire to work in the industry, UW-Madison’s Game Design and Development club gives students the opportunity to make games of their own. Founded in 2015, the club holds meetings every Wednesday at 6:30 p.m. in Room 131 of the Teacher Education Building. At the beginning of each semester, there are initial meetings to introduce new members and pitch ideas for projects. A typical meeting begins with Noah Kliemann, the club’s industry chair, going over recent events and upcoming game releases. The group also has social events, art workshops and guest speakers. Last semester, Dan Norton from Filament Games came to talk about how his company uses the medium as an educational tool. The Game Design and Development club creates games using engines like Unity and GameMaker, both of which are free to use. Other available resources for students include access to lynda.com for video tutorials on these programs. The club currently has five projects in development, with one of them being “Protagonist.” It’s a title that draws influences from games like “Undertale” and “The Stanley Parable.” UW-Madison sophomore and Game Design member Savannah Mann is the project’s leader. Featuring morality-based decision-making that caters to different playstyles, Mann said, “There’s four main routes, and each one reflects how people play games.” For certain presentational aspects, she took inspiration from Supergiant Games, the studio behind “Bastion” and “Transistor.” The company’s newest game “Pyre” has music layering where the songs change as you navigate levels. With the help of coders, Mann was able to implement this concept into “Protagonist.” The project has been in development for roughly two years: In that time, many members have come and gone, but their ideas have remained with the game. “That’s where the club mentality comes in,” Mann said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The brainchild of more than 20 people, “Protagonist” has culminated into one cohesive project, and the game has benefited greatly from it. While still in development, the project’s team released a playable demo last month that’s open to the public. Along with the club, the Teacher Education Building is also where you’ll find classes from UW-Madison’s Game Design department. Students of sophomore standing can take CURRIC 357: “Game Design 1” and CURRIC 277: “Videogames and Learning,” the latter of which focuses on elements and social issues related to games — it also fulfills the Comm B course requirement. Professor Aliah Darke, who teaches CURRIC 277, is a game designer herself. This gives students the chance to learn from those who have experience working in the video game industry. The university recently approved a Game Design certificate, but the finer details of the curriculum are still being finalized. Video games can still be a way to have fun — that much hasn’t changed. But what has changed is the definition of what a video game is. In addition to being forms of competition, many are now works of art. Today’s developers have elaborated on aspects like narration to tell stories we haven’t experienced yet in other mediums. “There’s so much that can be done in a game that can’t be done in stories,” Game Design board member Cindy Prentice said. “If you read about some tragic event that happened in history like Hurricane Katrina, it’s awful, but it’s just statistics. You might read a couple stories of a person’s recollections of what happened, but if you’re playing a game with a character who’s physically there on one of those houses, looking for food and terrified — that is a completely different experience.” Just like movies and music, there are many components in a video game: The main difference is that the first two are passive rather than active experiences. This unique level of interaction is why movies based on video games tend to be less than adequate, as directors are tasked with turning the dynamic moments of a game into a static, two-hour film. According to Prentice, the interactive nature of video games is what makes them more personal to us. “The actions you make change the experience for you, so no matter how the story is set up, it will be different for every person.” This personalization can resonate deeply with college students, as some of today’s games contain commentary on politics, sexuality and even mental health. With each new generation of video game systems, the graphics in games have only gotten better. As developers become closer to achieving photorealism, this level of fidelity will pose challenges in the way of art design. “It’s gonna be interesting to see how [graphics] continue to be new and innovative,” Game Design board member Kaitlyn Brayer said. If anything, developers will have to be more clever to ensure that style isn’t sacrificed for lifelike visuals. As for the future of storytelling in video games, Prentice predicts a return to immersive and grounded experiences, with less titles breaking the fourth wall and being self-aware. The mainstream press often stigmatizes the medium, claiming them to be addictive and harmful to society. Much of the conversation is about what video games can and can’t be, but doing so keeps us from seeing what they already are. With groups like UW-Madison’s Game Design and Development club, students use video games to play together, create together and share together. For more information, check out the club's website and Facebook page. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Courtesy of Greg Marks/NOAA Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory/Flickr Quagga mussels from a fish trawl sample photographed in Lake Michigan, August 2006. SCIENCE Discovery of invasive mussels in Lake Geneva deepens Wisconsin’s water crisis Quagga mussels, an invasive species first discovered in Lake Geneva last month, threaten the ecological balance of Wisconsin’s lakes and motivate new conservation efforts. By Elaina Russell September 26, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In a concerning development for Wisconsin’s cherished lakes, local and state officials discovered invasive quagga mussels in Geneva Lake last month, marking the first recorded presence of this species in an inland lake in the state. The find, confirmed by the Geneva Lake Environmental Agency (GLEA) after routine monitoring, raised significant environmental concerns among advocates and local communities alike. What are quagga mussels? Quagga mussels (Dreissena rostriformis bugensis), native to the Dnieper River in Ukraine, were first introduced to the Great Lakes in 1989, likely through ballast water from international shipping. They have spread rapidly across North America since then, outcompeting native species and disrupting local ecosystems. Unlike zebra mussels, another invasive species that poses a threat to freshwater environments, quagga mussels have demonstrated a greater capacity for adaptation and resilience. They thrive in colder, deeper waters, allowing them to inhabit a broader range of ecosystems. “Knowing what we know about quaggas and their ability to live on soft bottoms, it will be very important to monitor how they do in inland lakes,” said Jake Vander Zanden, professor and director of the Center of Limnology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Quagga mussels can also filter vast amounts of water, leading to increased clarity but ultimately reducing the population of phytoplankton that are crucial for the food web. As these mussels proliferate, they can alter nutrient cycles and affect the growth of aquatic plants and animals, potentially leading to significant ecological imbalances. Quagga mussels disrupt local ecosystems The introduction of quagga mussels into Geneva Lake raised alarms about the potential ecological repercussions not just for the lake itself, but for Wisconsin’s waterways as a whole, including Lake Mendota. As the largest lake in the Madison area, Lake Mendota is home to a diverse array of fish and other aquatic organisms. The interconnectedness of Wisconsin’s waterways means that an invasive species in one lake can easily spread to another through boat traffic, fishing gear or natural water movements. Lake Mendota faces its own set of challenges from invasive species, such as zebra mussels and the spiny water flea, which have already disrupted local ecosystems. The introduction of quagga mussels could exacerbate these issues, further threatening the lake’s biodiversity and the recreational activities that depend on it. Anglers, boaters and nature enthusiasts who frequent these waters may find their experiences diminished as invasive species take hold. Discovery sparks community conservation efforts Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The discovery of quagga mussels in Geneva Lake galvanized local communities and environmental advocates to take action. James Olson, a Wisconsin resident and attorney at LawtonCates, is spearheading an essential environmental initiative focused on addressing the critical issue of aquatic invasive species in the state’s lakes. This initiative centers around the “home lake” rule and targets wake boats, which can unintentionally transport invasive species between water bodies. Olson is joined by his paralegal, Kelsie Kufhal, who plays a crucial role in supporting this initiative. The initiative highlights the urgent need for preventive measures in response to the recent discovery of quagga mussels in Geneva Lake. Olson encourages community members to participate in monitoring efforts and practices for preventing the spread of invasive species. Collaboration among local agencies, environmental organizations and state officials will be crucial in developing effective management strategies. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources is expected to play a significant role in these efforts. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Maile Llanos | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Does the ‘Tortured Poet's Department’ deserve a Grammy? No An Album of the Year win could push Taylor Swift into a creative stagnation. By Marit Erickson November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST The 2025 Grammy Award nominations were released earlier this month with huge “pop-girl" names like Billie Eilish, Beyoncé, Taylor Swift, Charli XCX and Sabrina Carpenter making appearances in the Best Album category. 2024 has been an impressive year for women in music. Almost all of them went on global stadium tours, drawing in millions of fans every night. “Cowboy Carter,” “The Rise and Fall of a Midwest Princess,” “Short n’ Sweet,” “Hit Me Hard and Soft” and “Brat” all did great in the charts. But there is one project nominated that feels different from the rest: Swift’s 11th studio album, “The Tortured Poets Department.” Despite doing better numbers-wise than other nominations, I do not think it should be on the list at all. It is the worst thing Swift has released in her career thus far, and its success is a product of a brainwashed fan base and uninspired song writing. If it wins Album of the Year, it could halt the creativity Swifites love their mother for. It doesn’t bring me joy to denounce a beloved artists’ work — Swift appears in my Spotify Wrapped year after year despite me trying to look indie. But I think it is a more impressive feat as a fan to acknowledge their weak moments, their duds, their skips. “The Tortured Poets Department” is unfortunately that. Many of Swift’s diehard fans weaponize the mode of poetry as an excuse for lackluster melodies. But many of her lyrics throughout the album come across as melodramatic and whiney or infused with cringey millennial-isms. Titles like “My Boy Only Breaks His Favorite Toys,” “Down Bad,” “I Can Fix Him (No Really I Can)” and “Who’s Afraid of Little Old Me” will age like milk. I already can’t look at them without wincing. She also repeats metaphors to the point of cliche. Take “The Black Dog” and the line, “That was intertwined in the fabric of our dreaming” compared to the line “We embroidered the memories of the time I was away” in “loml.” Her poetry doesn’t work in this album because I don’t care about a billionaire’s plights. Why should we sob about her bad breakup when gas is $4 per gallon? Obviously, not everyone experiences heartbreak the same, but song titles like “I Hate It Here” saying she’s “scared to go outside,” and that she wishes she could live in the 1830s “but without all the racists” come across as inaccessible to non-billionaires. In “Who’s Afraid of Little Old Me,” Swift sings, “You don’t get to tell me about ‘sad.’” There are wars happening right now, girl. What are you talking about? And what if I don’t care about lyrics? What if I listen to music for the instruments and singing and not whatever deep message I can glean from its Genius website? Then “The Tortured Poets Department” loses all its impact, it does not compare to her earlier works like “Red,” “1989,” “Fearless” or “Speak Now.” This monotonous sound in the whopping 31 tracks of Swift’s deluxe edition blend together like a haze, connected by the droning synth producer Jack Antonof holds so tightly to his chest. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Consider the cultural phenomena that have emerged from some of the other albums nominated for Album of the Year. “Espresso” by Carpenter, “HOT TO GO!” by Chappell Roan and literally all of “Brat” by Charli XCX will be looked back on as defining the summer of 2024. These releases and their mass success mark a new era in music, with new faces in the pop-girl category. Many of the 2010s familiar faces like Katy Perry or Rihanna have taken a back seat in the charts, giving newcomers the opportunity to take the spotlight. Swift and Beyoncé occupy a similar space, with each existing in both old and new eras of pop. But where Beyoncé has evolved, pushing her creativity and mastering new genres in “Renaissance” and “Cowboy Carter,” Swift is nesting in the grossly familiar synth-pop. Hitting a plateau this late in your career is embarrassing, especially after the release of two masterpieces like “folklore” and “evermore.” This is the core of what bothers me about Swift’s 2025 Album of the Year nomination — she’s won (and lost) for work that was 10 times better. Maybe Swift’s loss in 2014 for “Red” is the reason for “The Tortured Poets Department’s” dullness. The main criticism against “Red” was that it lacked cohesion, and the sway between pop radio hits and country ballads was discouraged by critics. Swift would be better off ignoring the critics. The sonic variety of “Red” has been haunting her, lurking in the back of her mind for the last 10 years. Its result is over 30 tracks of the same stuff. If she wins in February, I'm afraid the positive feedback loop will never allow her to change. After almost 20 years in the music industry, Swift probably isn’t taking any advice from lowly arts desk writers like me. But as a fan, I really hope she goes in a different direction for future albums, and a fifth Album of the Year win might prevent that. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Scholarship Media | The Daily Cardinal SPONSORED The ultimate guide to home warranty benefits Homeownership is accompanied by the potential for unforeseen expenses, such as repairs and maintenance. A home warranty can be a safeguard, offering peace of mind when appliances and systems fail. By Scholarship Media June 16, 2024 | 11:32am CDT Homeownership is accompanied by the potential for unforeseen expenses, such as repairs and maintenance. A home warranty can be a safeguard, offering peace of mind when appliances and systems fail. It bridges the financial gap between homeowners insurance and out-of-pocket costs for home repairs. With a better understanding of home warranty benefits, homeowners can make informed decisions on protecting their investment. Keep reading to unravel the layers of home warranty coverage and the various advantages it provides. Understanding home warranty coverage and how it works A home warranty is a service contract designed to cover the repair or replacement of major home systems and appliances that break down over time. It operates distinctly from home insurance, which typically covers damages from specific events like fires or theft. Instead, home warranties focus on wear and tear of everyday use. This means if your water heater or oven stops working, a home warranty could address those issues without significant out-of-pocket costs. When a covered appliance or system in the home malfunctions, the homeowner contacts their warranty provider to file a claim. The provider then assesses the situation and, if covered, dispatches a technician to evaluate and fix the problem. There's typically a service fee for each visit, which is established in the warranty contract. Yet, this fee is generally minimal compared to the full cost of repairs or replacements. The scope of coverage can differ widely among providers and plans. Some plans offer basic coverage for the most common systems, while others might include additional items like pools or septic systems. Understanding the terms and exclusivities of different plans is crucial to avoid surprises when a breakdown occurs. For comprehensive options and details on coverage that suits your needs, a quick visit www.AFCHomeClub.com can illuminate the possibilities. Evaluating the financial advantages of a home warranty plan The most apparent financial advantage of a home warranty plan is the protection from high repair costs. When a major appliance or critical system fails, replacement costs can be substantial. With a home warranty, homeowners are responsible only for the service call fee and any uncovered costs, which are usually specified in the plan's terms. This makes budgeting for home maintenance more predictable. Another aspect to consider is the potential savings over time. While some homeowners may not use their warranty extensively every year, the cost of a single major repair can easily exceed the annual premium of the warranty plan. In this sense, investing in a home warranty may lead to long-term savings, especially if you own a home with older appliances or systems more prone to failure. There's also the factor of time and convenience. When an appliance breaks down, finding a reliable service technician can be challenging and time-consuming. Home warranty companies have networks of vetted contractors, simplifying the process and saving homeowners the hassle of searching for a trustworthy repair service. This can be an invaluable benefit during stressful times. Navigating the claims process: tips for a smooth experience The claims process can be a determining factor in the overall satisfaction with a warranty. Timely action is essential when an issue arises. Owners should immediately report the problem to their provider to prevent further damage and accelerate the process. Depending on the provider, claims can often be lodged online or over the phone, offering convenience and documentation of the reported issue. Having a clear understanding of your policy's terms, including the service fee and any limits on coverage, can prepare you for what to expect financially once a technician evaluates the issue. Keeping a copy of your contract accessible is useful for reference during the claims process, ensuring an agreement on the covered items and services. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Communication is key throughout the repair process. Home warranty companies will coordinate with their network professionals to address your needs, but it's crucial for homeowners to remain proactive. This includes confirming appointment times, providing access for the repair technician, and asking questions about the repairs being carried out to ensure clarity and satisfaction. Altogether, a home warranty can be a valuable asset in protecting your home and financial well-being. By understanding the key facets and judiciously navigating the claims process, homeowners can reap the benefits that warranties offer. Overall, whether safeguarding against unexpected repair bills or enhancing the appeal of a home for sale, a warranty stands as a prudent investment for any homeowner. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Enterprise Search for Businesses: A Guide Why you should never drive under the influence Best Practices for Successfully Developing and Deploying a Knowledge Management System
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Badgers don’t bother trying against Minnesota, fail to become bowl-eligible No, it wasn’t a dragon. The Wisconsin Badgers’ football team was slayed by a squad of Minnesota Golden Gophers. By Tomer Ronen December 2, 2024 | 12:15pm CST The honey badger is known for its tendency to play dead when wounded. On Friday, the Wisconsin Badgers (5-7) let themselves be killed off by the Minnesota Golden Gophers (7-5). It was a fitting end to a miserable second season for Luke Fickell — who fell to 12-13 as Wisconsin’s head coach after the 24-7 home loss — lifeless, uninteresting, cold and limp. The Badgers put up no fight in attempting to keep their 22-year bowl streak, the third-longest (now no longer) active in the country, alive against their border rivals, finishing the season with an empty cabinet for the first time since the team added a third trophy game in 2014 in what was a game full of “firsts.” The first five-game losing streak since 1991. The first Badgers team to lose Paul Bunyan’s Axe three of four times to Minnesota since 1990. And, somehow, the first and only start for quarterback Braedyn Locke without an interception this season. Don’t worry, Locke didn’t look any better than usual. The coldest game at Camp Randall since 1964 started off slow, with one first down between the two teams in four drives. A 37-yard strike from Gophers quarterback Max Brosmer to wide receiver Daniel Jackson warmed Minnesota up, propelling them into Badgers territory. A Brosmer touchdown run near the end of the first quarter gave them a lead they never relinquished. It seemed as though the Badgers were ready to roll over and let the season come to an end. Jackson consistently beat star cornerback Ricardo Hallman, and running back Darius Taylor gashed the once-fearsome Badger front-seven for 143 yards. Later in the second quarter, a 40-yard Marcus Major run off a fake tush push put the Gophers in scoring position. Even after Brosmer connected with Jackson in the end zone to give the Gophers a 14-0 lead, the Badgers had a chance late in the first half. Receiving the ball first to start the second half gave Wisconsin an opportunity to go two-for-one — scoring twice before Minnesota touched the ball again — and tie the game up. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Instead they punted on their next three drives. Wisconsin struggled to move the ball throughout the game, totaling an uninspired 167 yards on the day. Their biggest play was an 18-yard scamper by running back Tawee Walker, but it didn’t come until the start of the fourth quarter. The run gave the Badgers a breath of fresh air and a chance to cut the Gophers’ lead down to seven, but a third-and-7 holding penalty and incomplete pass put the Badgers in full give-up mode. With just over 12 minutes to go, down 14, a bowl on the line and a team that could barely scratch its way into enemy territory, Fickell decided to attempt a field goal rather than trying to keep the season alive. Naturally, kicker Nathaniel Vakos, a 66.7% field goal kicker from 30-39 yards coming into the game, missed from 37-yards out. Perhaps he just wanted in on the air of failure surrounding the team Friday. Just two drives later, Wisconsin’s season ended on a fourth-and-1 run from the shotgun. How fitting. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget
Photo by Katie Schiedt | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS ‘I’m safe and secure’: Missing Wisconsin man who faked his death found in Eastern Europe Watertown man Ryan Borgwardt confirmed he’s alive in Europe and talking to investigators but still unsure if he will return home, Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll said Thursday. By Jake Piper November 23, 2024 | 2:00am CST Ryan Borgwardt, the Watertown man who authorities believed faked his own death, has been communicating with investigators “almost daily” from Eastern Europe since Nov. 11, Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll said on Nov. 21. Investigators initially presumed Borgwardt dead after they discovered his overturned kayak in the heart of Green Lake. After 54 days of searching, investigators discovered Borgwardt had taken out a life insurance policy, made inquiries about moving funds to foreign bank accounts and obtained a new passport. Investigators hosted a press conference Nov. 8 in which they detailed the newly discovered evidence, along with their hypothesis that Borgwardt was still alive and in Eastern Europe. In the days following the press conference, Podoll said his team did a “blitz” of the phone numbers and emails they obtained from Borgwardt’s computer. After making contact with a “female who spoke Russian,” Podoll said the woman put Borgwardt in contact with authorities. “I’m safe and secure, no problem,” Borgwardt said in a video from an unknown location dated Nov. 11, shown at a Thursday press conference. Borgwardt told authorities that after dumping his phone and kayak in Green Lake, he rode a “child-sized inflatable boat” back to shore before riding an e-bike nearly 70 miles to Madison, where he boarded a Greyhound bus to Detroit. From there, investigators said he rode a bus to Canada and then flew out of the country. Borgwardt revealed that he fled the country for “personal matters” and “thought this was the right thing to do,” taking out a new $375,000 life insurance plan “for his family.” Borgwardt told investigators he chose Green Lake as the place to stage his death due to its status as the deepest natural lake in Wisconsin. Podoll said it “wasn’t in [Borgwardt’s] plan” to fake his own death but declined to comment on why he decided to, only saying Borgwardt didn’t leave the country out of fears for his personal safety. According to Podoll, he appeared to “express remorse” for “what he's put his family through the past several months,” along with the amount of man hours and money put into finding him. Borgwardt also said he didn’t anticipate investigators would search for him for “more than two weeks” in their initial investigation into his supposed death. Borgwardt has not made contact with his family in the 10 days since authorities first contacted him, according to officials. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email John Gross, Clinical Associate Professor of law at the University of Wisconsin-Madison told WMTV 15 News that while faking death is not a crime on its own, Borgwardt could be charged with an attempted fraudulent insurance claim, a Class I felony in Wisconsin. Other charges for Borgwardt are still up in the air, with Podoll saying the possibility of a local “obstructing charge,” federal charges and $35,000 to $40,000 in restitution payments await Borgwardt if he returns home. But Podoll told reporters that Borgwardt’s biggest concern about returning was how the community would react. Investigators said they were still working to bring Borgwardt back home. “Christmas is coming, and what better gift could he give his kids than to be there for Christmas with them,” Podoll said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball drops all three games against Nebraska Wisconsin Badgers softball sits at 12-20 on the season after three back-to-back losses against Nebraska. By Abby Shulman April 1, 2024 | 9:16pm CDT For their second series and first home series of the Big Ten season, the Wisconsin Badgers softball team challenged the Nebraska Huskers at the Goodman Softball Complex but fell short in all three games. The Badgers started the series with a high-scoring game that resulted in an 11-7 loss Friday. The game picked up in the top of the second, with pitcher Gabi Salo giving up a three-run homer. The Badgers retaliated in the next frame, leading 4-3 after catcher Emmy Wells slugged her ninth homer of the season, infielder Ellie Hubbard hit an RBI single and infielder Ava Kuszak hit a two-run double. Following a scoreless third inning, the Huskers and Badgers were tied 7-7 by the end of the fourth after reciprocated scoring during both frames. Pitcher Shelby Jacobson allowed back-to-back two-run singles for an initial 7-4 lead, but Wisconsin put the Huskers in their place at their home field, hitting four straight with another RBI from Kuszak and two runs driven in from infielder Fiona Girardot’s single. However, Nebraska responded with three more home runs over the next few innings, eventually winning 11-7. Saturday’s game mirror Friday’s scoring trends The Huskers led 2-0 in the top of the first off of starting pitcher Tessa Magnanimo before the Badgers bounced back again in the second inning. Wisconsin tied the game 2-2 after a series of hits including a lead-off double from catcher Hilary Blomberg, an RBI from Hubbard and a triple from outfielder Peyton Bannon. Both teams scored once in the third — an RBI from Nebraska and a sacrifice fly from Wisconsin’s Girardot — to raise the score to 3-3. Wisconsin played nearly flawless defense throughout the rest of the game except for the fifth inning, after which Jacobson took over the mound from Magnanimo. However, the Badgers’ offense faltered, and back-to-back home runs in the fifth inning put the Huskers up 7-3 to seal game two. Despite losing by a landslide, Wisconsin’s offense notched 11 hits compared to Nebraska’s nine. Nebraska finished off in dramatic fashion Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Identical to the start of Saturday’s game, Nebraska kicked off a 2-0 lead in the top of the first on a throwing error from Salo before Wisconsin tied it up in the bottom of the second. There were a total of ten hits throughout the game, including a lead-off double from Blomberg, an RBI from Hubbard, a triple from Bannon and an RBI from infielder Alivia Bark to catch up two apiece. Magnanimo took the mound in the third and gave up a run, giving the Huskers a 3-2 lead. While Nebraska proceeded to play a dry few innings, Wisconsin outdid them to take a 4-3 lead after Kuszak and Bannon crushed solo homers in the fifth and sixth, respectively. The Huskers tied the game in the seventh after a ball slipped from outfielder Kate Linkletter’s glove. Pushing through two more innings of the uphill battle against the Huskers, Bannon finally conquered the ball, slamming into the wall during the eighth to record an out and keep Nebraska from scoring and stealing the lead. However, Nebraska capitalized in the ninth to take the lead as Wisconsin failed to make a comeback in the last frame. The Badgers will take on in-state competition Green Bay in a doubleheader on Tuesday, April 2 at home at the Goodman Diamond. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
University of Wisconsin-Madison graduate student union members of the Teaching Assistants' Association occupied the Wisconsin State Capitol in 2011 to protest of Act 10, a proposal supported by Gov. Scott Walker and Republican lawmakers that would limit collective bargaining rights for public employees. Photo by Daily Cardinal archives | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Dane County judge strikes down more than 60 sections of Act 10 Dane County Circuit Court Judge Jacob Frost ruled over 60 sections of Wisconsin’s 2011 Act 10 law that curb collective bargaining rights for public sector unions are unconstitutional. By Julia Walkowicz December 2, 2024 | 7:19pm CST Dane County Circuit Court Judge Jacob Frost struck down more than 60 sections of Wisconsin’s 2011 Act 10 law that curbed collective bargaining rights for public sector unions in a ruling Monday. Frost’s ruling came after his opinion allowed lawsuits to continue against former Republican Gov. Scott Walker’s restrictions on public sector employee union size and power after denying a motion filed by the Republican-controlled Legislature to dismiss the case. Efforts to overturn the 13-year-old law began in November 2023, when several unions of public employees cited low pay, staffing shortages and poor conditions for work culminating in a “dire situation” in the workplace. The lawsuit argued that Act 10’s distinction between “general” and “public safety” employees violated equal protection guarantees of the Wisconsin Constitution. “Public safety” employees, such as police officers and firefighters, were unaffected by the law. For “general” employees, the bill curbed their collective bargaining rights and placed caps on wage increase negotiations to no more than the rate of inflation. Act 10 gave rise to a dramatic decrease in union membership, leading to less power for public servants in larger negotiations. Frost described the distinction between “general” and “public safety” employees as "irrational.” "I cannot solve Act 10's constitutional problems by striking the definition of 'public safety employee,' leaving the term undefined and leaving the remainder of the law in place," he wrote in Monday's ruling. In Monday’s ruling, Frost determined that several sections of Act 55, a follow-up to Act 10 in 2015, were also no longer enforceable. In a joint statement Monday, plaintiffs in the lawsuit commended Frost’s ruling while also noting it still has to make its way through the court’s system. "Today's decision is personal for me and my coworkers," conservation warden and AFSCME Local 1215 President Ben Gruber said in a statement. "As a conservation warden, having full collective bargaining rights means we will again have a voice on the job to improve our workplace and make sure that Wisconsin is a safe place for everyone. We realize there may still be a fight ahead of us in the courts, but make no mistake, we're ready to keep fighting until we all have a seat at the table again." In a separate statement Monday, the Teaching Assistants’ Association (TAA) celebrated the decision and called on the University of Wisconsin-Madison to voluntarily recognize the union. “The winds of change are blowing in our direction and we urge the university to take note and voluntarily recognize the TAA as the union of graduate workers and be prepared to meet us at the bargaining table,” Daniel Levitin, co-president of the TAA, said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Republican Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, who has staunchly defended the law, criticized Frost’s ruling in a statement Monday as fruitless. “This lawsuit came more than a decade after Act 10 became law and after many courts rejected the same meritless legal challenges. Act 10 has saved Wisconsin taxpayers more than $16 billion. We look forward to presenting our arguments on appeal,” Vos said. Walker called the decision “brazen political activism” on X, saying Frost’s ruling “makes the April 2025 Wisconsin Supreme Court race that much more important.” Senate Minority Leader Sen. Dianne Hesselbein, D-Middleton, applauded Frost’s ruling in a statement Monday. “This is a crucial step to recognize and restore the rights of hard-working public employees doing the people’s work in every corner of Wisconsin,” Hesselbein said. “There are likely further hurdles ahead and I applaud the resolve of those who have kept up the effort to restore the right to collectively bargain in the state.” Editor's note: this article was updated at 8:36 p.m. CDT on Monday, Dec. 2, 2024, to add a statement from the TAA. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S SOCCER Badgers’ 25th NCAA tournament appearance ends with third round defeat Wisconsin women’s soccer season comes to an end after falling 3-1 to No.1 seed USC in the NCAA tournament Sweet 16. By Gabriella Hartlaub December 3, 2024 | 12:53pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers women’s soccer team’s trip to the NCAA tournament ended on Sunday, Nov. 24 with a 3-1 loss to No. 1 seed University of Southern California in the third round. Sunday's game marked the Badgers’ first appearance in the Sweet 16 since 2021, but even a late goal from graduate student midfielder Dara Adringa couldn’t help them overcome a three-goal deficit to USC. Wisconsin’s first sign of trouble came in the last five minutes of the first half, where the Trojans were given a penalty kick that led to a goal. Fouls proved to be an issue for the Badgers as they wracked up 15 throughout the game. In the first half, Wisconsin out-fouled USC 8-1 and had zero shots on goal. This was a familiar feeling for the team, who went with no shots on goal in the first half of their matchup against No. 4 University of Virginia in the second round of the tournament. If the Badgers keptUSC out of the goalbox, they could’ve pulled off a similar victory to the one against Virginia in a penalty shootout. But once the second half started, USC’s intense offense and scoring, something that they’ve come to be known for, pressed down on the Badgers in full force. The Trojans’ second goal came in the 58th minute with the third coming less than five minutes later. That, coupled with the penalty kick goal from the first half, proved insurmountable for a Badgers team that had three shots on goal the entire game. Wisconsin's season ends with a 10-6-5 overall record and a 5-1-3 record in the Big Ten. In tournament play, Ohio State knocked the Badgers out of the Big Ten Tournament 0-1 and USC defeated them in the Sweet 16. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
With comical performances and a bizarre plant that talks and sings, “Little Shop of Horrors” has it all. Photo by Image courtesy of Wikimedia Commons | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Theater to look forward to this fall By Allison Garfield and overture's rising stars September 5, 2018 | 7:30am CDT Madison is a hub of culture when it comes to the arts — concerts, art shows and poetry slams can be found every weekend. Few realize, however, that Madison also hosts dozens of theater performances, from Broadway tours to local productions. Here’s your guide for what to keep an eye out for this fall. Overture’s Rising Stars (Overture Center) On September 15, the Overture Center will host its fifth annual talent search showcase, aimed at displaying the wealth of talent in the local community. Twenty-one selected finalists will perform on the Capitol Theater stage for a chance to win the grand prize: the opportunity to perform during the Overture Center’s 2019-20 season. Little Shop of Horrors (University Theater) “Little Shop of Horrors” tells the story of Seymour, the mild-mannered plant store employee who discovers a rare plant that could help save the store and win him the girl. However, Seymour soon discovers that his strange and unusual plant can talk, sing and wants human blood. University Theater will be rebooting their production of the sci-fi-horror-comedy-musical after its summer run. Performances will take place in the Mitchell Theatre September 13-23. A Lady and a Woman (StageQ) Written by Shirlene Holmes, this critically acclaimed play is about love and hope in a time where it was dangerous to believe in such things. Set in a small Southern town, the show follows two African-American women in the late 19th century who find courage in each other. StageQ, who is bringing this show to Madison, celebrates queer diversity through quality theater written by and about LGBTQ people, according to the theater’s website. The show will have a limited two-week run from October 26 to November 3. Something Rotten! (Overture Center) Kicking off the Center’s Broadway at Overture season, “Something Rotten!” is for Shakespeare lovers and haters alike. Set in 1595, this show tells the story of Nick and Nigel Bottom, two brothers who are desperate to write a hit play. Nick seeks out his local fortune teller who sees singing, dancing and acting — all at once — in his future, thus inventing the modern musical. His biggest competition is William Shakespeare, who, even then, is a big hit with the local townspeople. The show will make its Wisconsin debut on October 9 and will run until October 14. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Fun Home (Forward Theater Company) Alison’s father was full of secrets that she must uncover following his death. Though he taught high school English during the day, his spare time was spent running the family’s funeral home business and restoring their debilitated house. Alison recalls her childhood to understand how her father’s choices affect her present. This Tony Award-winning musical is not a part of the Center’s Broadway series but will feature Broadway alum and former UW-Madison professor Karen Olivo. (Olivo won a Tony for her performance as Anita in the revival of West Side Story, starred in “In the Heights” and recently performed in “Hamilton” in Chicago). The musical will run limitedly from November 1-25. Allison Garfield is an arts editor for the Daily Cardinal. To read more of her work, click here . Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Photo by Maile Llanos | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Does the ‘Tortured Poet's Department’ deserve a Grammy? No An Album of the Year win could push Taylor Swift into a creative stagnation. By Marit Erickson November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST The 2025 Grammy Award nominations were released earlier this month with huge “pop-girl" names like Billie Eilish, Beyoncé, Taylor Swift, Charli XCX and Sabrina Carpenter making appearances in the Best Album category. 2024 has been an impressive year for women in music. Almost all of them went on global stadium tours, drawing in millions of fans every night. “Cowboy Carter,” “The Rise and Fall of a Midwest Princess,” “Short n’ Sweet,” “Hit Me Hard and Soft” and “Brat” all did great in the charts. But there is one project nominated that feels different from the rest: Swift’s 11th studio album, “The Tortured Poets Department.” Despite doing better numbers-wise than other nominations, I do not think it should be on the list at all. It is the worst thing Swift has released in her career thus far, and its success is a product of a brainwashed fan base and uninspired song writing. If it wins Album of the Year, it could halt the creativity Swifites love their mother for. It doesn’t bring me joy to denounce a beloved artists’ work — Swift appears in my Spotify Wrapped year after year despite me trying to look indie. But I think it is a more impressive feat as a fan to acknowledge their weak moments, their duds, their skips. “The Tortured Poets Department” is unfortunately that. Many of Swift’s diehard fans weaponize the mode of poetry as an excuse for lackluster melodies. But many of her lyrics throughout the album come across as melodramatic and whiney or infused with cringey millennial-isms. Titles like “My Boy Only Breaks His Favorite Toys,” “Down Bad,” “I Can Fix Him (No Really I Can)” and “Who’s Afraid of Little Old Me” will age like milk. I already can’t look at them without wincing. She also repeats metaphors to the point of cliche. Take “The Black Dog” and the line, “That was intertwined in the fabric of our dreaming” compared to the line “We embroidered the memories of the time I was away” in “loml.” Her poetry doesn’t work in this album because I don’t care about a billionaire’s plights. Why should we sob about her bad breakup when gas is $4 per gallon? Obviously, not everyone experiences heartbreak the same, but song titles like “I Hate It Here” saying she’s “scared to go outside,” and that she wishes she could live in the 1830s “but without all the racists” come across as inaccessible to non-billionaires. In “Who’s Afraid of Little Old Me,” Swift sings, “You don’t get to tell me about ‘sad.’” There are wars happening right now, girl. What are you talking about? And what if I don’t care about lyrics? What if I listen to music for the instruments and singing and not whatever deep message I can glean from its Genius website? Then “The Tortured Poets Department” loses all its impact, it does not compare to her earlier works like “Red,” “1989,” “Fearless” or “Speak Now.” This monotonous sound in the whopping 31 tracks of Swift’s deluxe edition blend together like a haze, connected by the droning synth producer Jack Antonof holds so tightly to his chest. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Consider the cultural phenomena that have emerged from some of the other albums nominated for Album of the Year. “Espresso” by Carpenter, “HOT TO GO!” by Chappell Roan and literally all of “Brat” by Charli XCX will be looked back on as defining the summer of 2024. These releases and their mass success mark a new era in music, with new faces in the pop-girl category. Many of the 2010s familiar faces like Katy Perry or Rihanna have taken a back seat in the charts, giving newcomers the opportunity to take the spotlight. Swift and Beyoncé occupy a similar space, with each existing in both old and new eras of pop. But where Beyoncé has evolved, pushing her creativity and mastering new genres in “Renaissance” and “Cowboy Carter,” Swift is nesting in the grossly familiar synth-pop. Hitting a plateau this late in your career is embarrassing, especially after the release of two masterpieces like “folklore” and “evermore.” This is the core of what bothers me about Swift’s 2025 Album of the Year nomination — she’s won (and lost) for work that was 10 times better. Maybe Swift’s loss in 2014 for “Red” is the reason for “The Tortured Poets Department’s” dullness. The main criticism against “Red” was that it lacked cohesion, and the sway between pop radio hits and country ballads was discouraged by critics. Swift would be better off ignoring the critics. The sonic variety of “Red” has been haunting her, lurking in the back of her mind for the last 10 years. Its result is over 30 tracks of the same stuff. If she wins in February, I'm afraid the positive feedback loop will never allow her to change. After almost 20 years in the music industry, Swift probably isn’t taking any advice from lowly arts desk writers like me. But as a fan, I really hope she goes in a different direction for future albums, and a fifth Album of the Year win might prevent that. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Wisconsin football's head coach Luke Fickell at the first home game of the 2023 season. Photo by Evan Halpop | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Column: Fickell showed no improvement in year two. Is it time for the Badgers to move on? The Badgers are inconsistent and underperforming, does the problem run deeper than Luke Fickell? By Tomer Ronen November 27, 2024 | 5:10pm CST When Athletic Director Chris McIntosh and the Wisconsin Badgers announced Luke Fickell as their next head coach, there was optimism, pride and — with a 12-team college football playoff on the horizon — hope. But two years later, it would be hard to say they’ve made much progress even if they beat Minnesota on Friday. Paul Chryst, who led the Badgers to three New Year’s Six bowls in eight seasons, was fired from the head position following a 2-3 start to the 2022 season, on the heels of an embarrassing loss to Illinois at Camp Randall, and it was absolutely the right decision at the time. His replacement, interim head coach Jim Leonhard, led the team to a 4-3 record the rest of the way, but another home loss, this time to Minnesota, brought the Axe to his short-lived time as the face of the program. I’m not here to argue they should have stayed. The opportunity to hire the hotshot coach from Cincinnati was an opportunity the Badgers couldn’t pass up, but so far Fickell has seemed in over his head. Last week, Wisconsin was embarrassed at Memorial Stadium by a Nebraska team that hadn’t beaten them since the Bret Bielema era. Two weeks ago, the team suffered a loss full of excuses — including the firing of offensive coordinator Phil Longo — to the No. 1 team in the country. Before that, a disaster in Iowa City and a second half collapse against Penn State. TOGETHER, the losses mark the first four-game skid for the Badgers since 2008. A loss Friday would be the longest winless streak for the Badgers since 1991, Barry Alvarez’s second season as head coach. Pointing fingers So who’s to blame? At face value, it seems Fickell is throwing Longo, who led the Badgers to an underwhelming 97th national scoring and 102nd passing rankings through the first 10 games, under the bus. Fickell’s most stout defenders will offer him a mulligan, with injuries to quarterbacks Tanner Mordecai last year and Tyler Van Dyke this year unceremoniously thrusting Braedyn Locke into the starting role in the biggest spots. The Badgers have even shown the ability to compete. They led the Nittany Lions at halftime, and they were just a missed call away from taking down the mighty Ducks. But looking at the game as a whole makes it clear: the Badgers have been inconsistent, outplayed and outcoached by their opposition week after week. Ultimately, it comes down to Fickell. EVERYONE knows Fickell — who told fans he had just one goal “to play for a championship” at his introductory press conference — is the face of this program. His grit, toughness and history of success with Cincinnati made him feel like a perfect fit to carry on a Wisconsin legacy. Instead, he’s shifted it in the opposite direction. The Badgers have been at their best when they’ve had a clear identity: running the ball and playing good defense. Under Fickell’s command, they’ve fallen to the middle of the pack in both, 52nd and 64th, respectively. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email As football shifts to a quarterback’s game, the Badgers have tried to become a team that relies heavily on the spread formations and airing it out, something they unsuccessfully tried to ACHIEVE through Longo’s Air Raid offense. In 2022 under Chryst, the Badgers ranked 117th in passing attempts. Last year, they skyrocketed to 19th. With future NFL running back Braelon Allen still in the picture, rushing attempts dropped from 45th to 72nd. A clear shift in philosophy. On defense, Fickell’s side of the ball, the team has dropped from 17th in points allowed per game under Chryst in 2022 to 52nd this year and from 10th in yards allowed per game to a measly 39th. Shouldn’t you excel at your specialty? Maybe we’ve set expectations too high. Winning in what is now a “Power Two conference” is difficult, and past Badgers teams were consistently able to overperform, courtesy of the now defunct Big Ten West division. Maybe fans need to tone it down a little. Maybe home against Northwestern really is a tough matchup. South Dakota is an FCS school, but they were ranked No. 6 after all, so it’s a quality win! We might need to take off those rose-colored glasses because the schedules don’t get easier from here. What’s next? With Wisconsin on the hook for $40 million if Fickell is fired at the end of the season — a number likely out of McIntosh’s budget — getting rid of him is likely off the table for now. Instead, the expensive head coach will seek a new front man on the offensive side of the ball when the season draws to a close, despite his insistence that he doesn’t think “it really is important as to who is calling [the offense].” Whoever the Badgers hire for their offensive coordinator spot will signify the direction the organization is headed. A run-the-rock, three-yards-and-a-cloud-of-dust signing will signify the return to ways of old. A progressive, air-it-out, spread-offense addition will show a return to the Longo style of play, leaving fans hoping to squeeze out its full potential. On the other side of the ball, Fickell will have to do better. Two Rivals four-star defensive backs from the 2024 class should see increased playing time in their sophomore years, and a spread of three-star players with an extra year under their belt will look to help push the Badgers to the next level. But for Badgers fans, a glance at the 2025 schedule likely elicits a sigh. Wisconsin is scheduled to head to Tuscaloosa to face Alabama before heading into a Big Ten schedule that includes trips to Indiana, Michigan and Oregon and play host to Ohio State at Camp Randall. But it’s MORE than just gloom and doom for the team in cardinal and white. Fickell has recruited well on paper, with 2024 and 2025 recruiting classes ranked in the top 20 by Rivals. And the Badgers have hope under center, with four-star Florida recruit quarterback Carter Smith — whose classification as a “dual-threat” quarterback has fans reminiscing about Russell Wilson — announcing his commitment to the 2025 class earlier this week. With teams like Indiana, Colorado and Arizona State turning things around in the blink of an eye, it’s fair for Badger fans to have hope. And with revenue sharing on the horizon, the landscape of college football will once again see a massive shift. But leaving fans optimistic about teenagers who may not touch the field for another two or three years only works if the Badgers can pull it together, and a potential end to the famed 22-year bowl game streak already has them antsy. Fickell will need his T.E.A.M. to exceed expectations to make it out of 2025 unscathed. Perhaps fans need to temper theirs. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Jason Nolen and one of his three cats, Bean, who is a year old, playing together on Oct. 12, 2024. Photo by Ella Hanley | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison’s cat whisperer: The professor behind a purr-fect Instagram Jason Nolen, a sociology and criminology professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, has spent the past eight years curating a cat community among Madison residents. By Ella Hanley November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST Jason Nolen is known primarily as a sociology and criminology professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, but his living room tells a different story. Its walls are covered in cat-themed artwork, a testament to his more than eight years as a dedicated cat enthusiast. Beyond his work at UW-Madison, Nolen runs @cats_of_madison, an Instagram account showcasing different feline residents of Madison. He told The Daily Cardinal the account was created in 2016 on a whim after he posted photos of a neighborhood cat to his personal account and noticed there was no account dedicated to Madison’s cats. Now, the account has amassed more than 27,000 followers and features daily posts of cats that Nolen has personally come across on porches, at shelters and in people’s homes. “After it became popular, I was like, okay, the pressure's on,” Nolen said. “Then I was like, ‘Wait, where am I going to find cats to take pictures of?’ I started thinking about it, really looking for cats and I realized they’re just everywhere. Porch cats are everywhere. I kind of trained my eye to spot them.” Nolen began going on "catwalks," walking around certain neighborhoods with a high likelihood of running into a lounging porch cat. Neighborhoods east of the isthmus like Monroe Street, Marquette and Williamson Street are the “cat hot spots,” he said. As the account gained popularity, Nolen began receiving requests to photograph cats in people’s homes, which he does often and always for free. “There’s so many cats I know now that also know me and cats who are generally afraid of people that I’ve built a rapport with,” Nolen said. “They’ll come say hi, and that means a lot.” Nolen said he’d never considered himself to be good at photography. But over the years, through practice, he’s gotten better at understanding the best angles and how to get photos that really “demonstrate a cat’s personality.” "I feel like if I wanted to find a different career, I could become a cat behaviorist,” he said. “I've learned so many things, like how to behave, move or act in relation to what a cat is doing and I’ve become good at it. I've had to become good at it, so that cats will trust me and come up to me and interact with me." Nolen also said he keeps a “backlog” of photos, which will be used as content through the winter once the porch cats are back inside. Madisonians feel paw-sitive about community cat bonding Over the years, Nolen has formed partnerships with local cat shelters, including the Madison Cat Project. The shelter holds cat adoption fairs every other Saturday, and Nolen typically visits a few days beforehand to take photos of the adoptable cats ahead of the event. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Nolen said shelter workers have told him they often hear people visiting the adoption fairs to meet a cat they’d seen on Cats of Madison. He also gets direct messages from followers, which he loves. “People tell me my account is the best part of their day,’” Nolen said. “When people say things like that, it almost makes me want to start crying. I feel so happy.” Additionally, Nolen has facilitated reunions of people and their lost cats, and when a beloved neighborhood cat passes away, the community grieves together. “When I find out a cat I’ve posted about has passed, I always make sure to honor them. If it’s a cat I've posted a photo of before, I’ll share all the posts I did about them in my stories, along with their name and flowers on either side,” said Nolen. “I don’t say ‘RIP,’ but the flowers show that they’ve passed. Cats of Madison becomes this kind of community space for shared grief, which means a lot to me.” Cats on campus Nolen became a lecturer at UW-Madison in fall 2022 and has taught sociology, ethnicity and criminology classes. Next semester, he will teach Sociology of Companion Animals at UW-Madison, a course he will create based on his “field experience” with pets. “In my criminology class, though, I’ve shown pictures and videos of my cats. I’ve told students — I've done this in past semesters too — to send me pictures of their pets and tell me a little about them,” Nolen said. “Then, at the start of lecture, I’ll take the first minute to say, ‘Here’s so-and-so’s pet,’ and I’ll share interesting stuff about them. Students really seem to like that.” However, he never tells his students about his Instagram accounts, including @dogs.of.madison, and generally waits until a student realizes that it’s him to say something. “The best part about all this for me is that I've made so many cat friends,” Nolen said. “And I know that it's maybe a little bizarre, but it's become an important part of my social life. And that's really meaningful to me, because I really love cats." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
The UW-Madison law building photographed on Dec. 4, 2024. Photo by Emma Schieffer | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Instructors from conservative law firm will teach UW law course, drawing student criticism The University of Wisconsin–Madison Law School hired Skylar Croy and Daniel Lennington to teach a constitutional law course this upcoming spring semester. Some students, who attended clerkship programs WILL sued to alter diversity requirements, disagree By Wanwa Omot December 5, 2024 | 5:00am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison law student Mary Berg was shocked and upset when she learned attorneys from conservative law firm the Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty (WILL), Skylar Croy and Daniel Lennington, would be teaching a Constitutional Amendments course next spring. The course — “Selected Problems in Constitutional Law: Constitutional Litigation" — focuses on the Reconstruction Amendments: the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments of the United States Constitution. Students will draw expertise from landmark cases such as Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) and Brown v. Board of Education (1954), according to a draft syllabus obtained by The Daily Cardinal. Berg says the hiring of Croy by the law school is “astounding” because Croy “intentionally puts students in harm’s way,” according to her statement sent to UW Law School deans obtained by the Cardinal. Berg participated in the Wisconsin State Bar’s Diversity Clerkship Program, a summer employment program for law students. WILL sued the State Bar in December 2023, claiming the program was unconstitutional for discriminating against students on the basis of race and other “immutable characteristics” in their diversity definition. Croy told WPR in a statement defeating “unconstitutional DEI (diversity, equity and inclusion) programs” has become the WILL’s area of expertise. The firm specializes in culture war topics and is also suing the federal government over the McNair Scholarship for underrepresented students. During the lawsuit, partially redacted documents including student’s personal statements, resumes and contact information — including Berg’s — were made available on WILL’s website. “That kind of freaked me out more than anything. Given the atmosphere surrounding these conversations…I think it’s pretty easy for you and I to conceptualize the kind of harassment,” Berg said. “Some people want to enroll in this course and really use this as a test of their ideological strength. I am not one of those people.” The litigation of the constitutionality of programs like the Diversity Clerkship Program has increased since the U.S. Supreme Court rejected affirmative action in June 2023. The State Bar and WILL settled in April 2024, with the program continuing with a modified version of the definition of diversity which includes more language of the diversity of experiences and viewpoints. Croy and Lennigton have criticized the law school directly, demanding it remove content from the school’s “Re-Orientation” program, a mandatory program for all first-year law students. WILL argued that the school was “pushing racist ideology on law students.” Despite their criticism of the law school, Croy says he has a lot of respect for the law school and the course will be neutral in viewpoints. Students can expect a “run-of-the-mill” course, learning about procedural matters when arguing in cases involving the Reconstruction Amendments that outlawed slavery, granted citizenship to those born or naturalized in the United States and prohibited federal and state governments from denying citizen’s right to vote “on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” respectively. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I think it would be very good for students to try to get in a class like this with instructors that they have some concerns about, because if your goal in life is to someday go to court and argue against organizations like WILL, what better way to prep for that?” Croy said. Berg said she does not have a problem with the course itself or that attorneys from a conservative law firm will teach but rather the fact that it’s being taught by Croy and Lennington, who specifically published Berg’s and others’ personal records, obtained through a public records request. UW-Madison spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Croy and Lennington were fully qualified to teach the course. “We are committed to fostering a diversity of viewpoints, and having these instructors teach this course furthers that goal,” Lucas said. Other law students like Samantha Crane plan to take the course next semester and look forward to learning more about constitutional law. “Why are UW Law students upset about a reconstruction amendments course being taught this spring?,” Crane said in a Tweet. “If people are upset about it, I would say that I think people should take the class,” Crane said. Croy and Lennington have previously crossed paths with UW Law School. Croy graduated in 2019 second in his class from UW Law School, Order of the Coif, and served as the editor-in-chief of the Wisconsin Law Review. This will be both Croy and Lennington’s first time teaching at UW Law School. Editor's Note: This story was last updated at 11:30 a.m. on Dec. 8, 2024. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A landscape photographed at Blackfeet Indian Reservation in Montana, which could be used for solar or wind farms. Courtesy of Haley Rains SCIENCE Native Americans on reservations struggle with economic growth. Green energy could be a solution The potential of green energy on Native American reservations is left unrealized by stringent regulations, hindering growth, according to UW-Madison researchers. By Joseph Panzer October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Native Americans living on reservations continually face a poverty rate nearly double the national average of all races and ongoing business obstacles that hinder economic growth. The U.S. government pushed Native Americans onto reservation land in 1820-50. Indigenous groups were deprived of natural resources like oil and gold that could be used to build capital. A recent study by University of Wisconsin-Madison professors Dominic Parker and Sarah Johnston found that extracting energy from renewable sources like the sun or the wind with little environmental impact could be the force that changes this long standing problem. European settlers pushed Indigenous people onto poor farmland when creating reservations, which tends to be windier, more arid and more suited for modern wind and solar energy, the Nature Energy study said. Green energy accounted for 6% of U.S. GDP growth in 2023 and has employed more people than the fossil fuel industry since 2021, according to an analysis by the International Energy Agency. Still, the road to developing these resources for Native American tribes is fraught with difficulty. To drill oil on Native American land requires 49 permitting steps, and the approval process can take over three years due to intense federal regulations governing tribes. By contrast, developing oil on state land only requires four permitting steps and typically takes three months. And developing a plan for solar or wind power generation on tribal lands requires both a coordination of internal power with the federal government. This poses a particular challenge for tribal companies who, due to federal policies that have divided tribal land into hundreds of parcels, must get approval from each of the parcels’ owners before starting an energy project. “This regulatory jumble makes energy projects almost as uncommon as where they are forbidden, such as in public parks, forests and wildlife refuges,” Parker told UW-Madison. The Inflation Reduction Act allocated $14 billion in subsidies and incentives for developing wind and solar power on tribal lands before 2026, but those incentives are often locked behind the condition that tribes connect to a regional electrical grid. For many tribes, this process is time-consuming and requires legal resources that they do not possess. The U.S. Department of Energy has issued resource guides for Native American communities, emphasizing that they wish to respect tribal sovereignty when issuing resources for energy development on tribal lands. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Finnegan Ricco | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget The Student Services Finance Committee recommended an increase in student segregated fees after request from University Health Services to prevent staffing cuts, increase patient visits. By Elijah Pines December 10, 2024 | 4:32pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison’s Student Services Finance Committee (SSFC) recommended a $27 increase in student tuition Monday night in order for University Health Services (UHS) to maintain its current services and prevent staffing cuts. The SSFC is an Associated Students of Madison (ASM) committee of students in charge of allocating student segregated fees, a part of tuition that funds certain student services like bus passes and the Wisconsin Union. UHS asked the SSFC for a 10% increase to its fee, which currently costs students $277 per semester. UHS intentionally spent most of its cash reserves in the past several years, according to Jake Baggott, the executive director of UHS. The fee will help fill 17 staff vacancies within UHS and prevent more from leaving. “I feel like we have a clear direction to move forward,” Baggott told The Daily Cardinal Monday. UHS staff are currently “feeling extraordinary levels of stress” trying to see as many students as possible, Baggott said. The 17 vacancies are currently being recruited for and will help alleviate UHS patient load as well as increase patient visits by 17,000 visits, according to UHS. “I assure you, we will lose staff if we don't fill these positions,” Baggott told the committee. The recommendation includes wording to prevent fee increases above 4% per year for the next five years, in line with a UHS internal financial forecast of predicted expenses. However, if the forecast is inaccurate and UHS expenses are larger than predicted, fees may increase above 4%. SSFC initially recommended not increasing segregated fees and for UHS to implement cost saving measures. The committee believes UHS has an “outsized burden” on the segregated fee, taking up 35% of the total segregated fee, according to SSFC Chair Elijah Lin. Still, Baggott argued the increased fee wasn’t intended to expand UHS operations but to prevent staffing loss. Baggott also said UHS was granted a 10% segregated fee increase last year but only implemented a 5% increase. Lin told the Cardinal SSFC’s original recommendation was made before they were informed of what no increase in segregated fees would entail. The committee received an email stating that UHS would be prevented from hiring certain positions in the spring. SSFC also asked UHS to make a committee to look at cost-cutting measures and revenue generation. Baggott told the committee UHS was already planning on creating one in the spring. Lin said the committee came to agree with the 10% increase to keep those positions filled, with the clauses to cap further increases, and that SSFC is “making sure that we stay within fiscal responsibility for the coming years.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email SSFC’s recommendations will be sent to Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin for her approval, and if accepted, added to next year’s fiscal budget. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
UW student and singer-songwriter Christa Lee performs at Memorial Union on October 4, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by David Saddler | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Indie music meets UW-Madison spirit in Christa Lee Senior Christa Klais, better known as singer-songwriter Christa Lee, spoke with The Daily Cardinal about balancing school and music. By Madeline Wooten October 30, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Working toward dreams and passions while in college may be a challenge to some, but University of Wisconsin-Madison senior Christa Klais learned how to balance her school and music career gracefully. While pursuing her bachelor’s degree, Klais has found success writing and performing music under the name Christa Lee. Since the age of two, Klais knew exactly who she wanted to be when she grew up — a singer. “I grew up loving [music]. My mother was a singer, so I always loved it and had a passion for it,” Klais said. “It always felt like my soul lived in music.” She auditioned for every opportunity she could get to sing in school and was raised with an “adoration” of music and artists from the 1980s. Amy Winehouse, Prince, Raye, Remi Wolf and Harry Styles inspired Klais. As her sound changed, so have her influences. Now, Klais admires Chappell Roan, Kali Uchis, Doja Cat, Faye Webster, SZA and Clairo. Klais reflected on her live performances this year as she performed her songs at the Memorial Union concert series on Oct. 4 with music artist Rosie Tucker. “It felt so good and natural. I had just been waiting to do it for such a long time,” Klais said about performing in front of a live audience. “It felt like my soul had a release of some sort because this is what I’ve been dreaming of my whole life.” Klais recently performed alongside UW-Madison a capella group Under A-Rest for a “Artists for Abortion Access” event series Oct. 24. Maintaining a work-life balance as a college student is no easy feat, and sometimes school makes Klais’ music take a pause to put school first. But outside of midterms and exams, Klais finds time to focus more on her music and creating sound. “It can be hard to be in a space where academics and sports are taken so seriously but the arts feel overlooked,” she said. “For me, it can definitely feel like I’m behind on both at all times, but in reality, I’m doing it, and it’s something I’m proud of.” Klais has big things coming as she continues working on unreleased songs, hoping to eventually release an album to take her audience “on a journey of an extended piece and tell a story,” she said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Despite possible judgment from peers, Klais continues to follow her dreams. She’s trying to make her mark as a musician even “in an environment where it is hard to feel like art is appreciated and worthy of taking up space.” she said. “It’s in those moments that I really choose myself and my dreams and make my innermost self proud and excited for more,” she said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Wisconsin loses Freedom Trophy 44-25 to Nebraska The Wisconsin football team missed several first down opportunities against a heavy Nebraska defense, bringing the Badgers to 14th place in the Big Ten. By Tejas Rao November 26, 2024 | 1:34pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers football team (5-6) lost to the University of Nebraska Cornhuskers (6-5) at Memorial Stadium in Lincoln, Nebraska, on Saturday. While the Badgers lead the overall series 13-5, the Cornhuskers claimed this year’s Freedom Trophy, marking the 10th edition of the Wisconsin-Nebraska historic rivalry. The Badgers’ offense missed several first-down conversions in crucial moments of the game, eventually leading to numerous three-and-outs and forced punts. Wisconsin quarterback Braedyn Locke threw a total of 292 yards with a 66.6% completion, but in the end, it just wasn’t enough to beat the Cornhuskers’ defense in the red zone. Wisconsin’s running backs Darion Dupree and Tawee Walker totalled a combined 121 yards, only eight yards more than the Cornhuskers top rusher Emmett Johnson, who had 113 yards alone. Strong plays from Nebraska’s offensive line and linebackers allowed Johnson to move smoothly through the defensive line and further down the field to create easy rushing touchdowns for the other running backs on his team. The second piece to Nebraska’s successful rushing game was running back Dante Dowell, who contributed to three rushing touchdowns. A complete rushing offense is something the Badgers have struggled to succeed in all season, and against Nebraska’s heavy defense furthered the points gap throughout the ball game. The Badgers’ defense also lacked coordination throughout the game, allowing Raiola and his men to convert to a first down every time Nebraska was within 10 yards, regardless of which down they were currently in. The loss to Nebraska marks the Badgers’ third away loss of the season and their fourth consecutive loss. While the chances of earning a sixth win and earning a spot in a bowl game are low, there were a couple positive takeaways in Saturday’s game. Locke’s completed passes gained the Badgers crucial end zone points and first-down conversions. A better pass completion percentage could very well ensure victories in the upcoming game against the Minnesota Gophers and future seasons’ games. These past two games against Oregon and Nebraska have proved Wisconsin’s offensive line has the ability to maintain the pocket much better than before and looks to be improving game by game. A clean pocket paired with more usage of passing plays may just be the Badgers’ way forward. Wisconsin’s receivers put up all three of their touchdowns against Nebraska, including a two-point conversion. Locke has averaged 1.1 interceptions per game this season, at least one interception every game he’s played in as the Badgers’ quarterback, and seems to be the only barrier stopping Wisconsin from achieving their maximum offensive capabilities. Wisconsin heads back home to Camp Randall on Friday to host the annual Paul Bunyan Axe game against border rival University of Minnesota in their final game of the college football season. The defensive line and linebackers must help out in getting three-and-outs and forcing turnovers. This, in coordination with better passing plays and smarter rushes, is the key to take down the Minnesota Gophers and potentially become bowl-eligible with a 6-6 record in regular season play. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin finishes Kajikawa Classic with three straight shutout wins in Tempe The Wisconsin Badgers softball team started their season 4-1 after three phenomenal consecutive takedowns. By Abby Shulman February 14, 2024 | 1:34pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Boise State Broncos and Maine Black Bears in a doubleheader Saturday, allowing a whopping total of zero runs from their opponents en route to winning each game 9-0. Wisconsin outfielder Brooke Kuffel gave the Badgers an early 1-0 lead in the top of the second against Boise State after mirroring her solo homer from their last game just a day before against GCU. After a slow few innings, the Badgers scored another five runs in the fourth. Catcher Emmy Wells hit a two run homer — her first homerun with the Badgers — and infielder Alivia Bark hit the first homerun of her career, clearing the center field fence. After a couple of sac-flies and yet another homerun from Kuffel in the sixth, the Badgers ended 9-0 for pitcher Tessa Magnanimo’s second career shutout. Magnanimo pitched all six innings, allowing no runs or walks. Wisconsin then swept Maine, improving their all-time record against the Black Bears to 6-0. Outfielder Molly Schlosser set the stage for success after knocking one over the right field fence for a leadoff homer. Taking advantage of Maine’s errors, the Badgers were already up 6-0 by the end of the second. Being one of only seven players in Badgers softball history to record a home run in three straight games, Kuffel continued her hot streak and joined the exclusive list of players to do so. With back-to-back home runs from her and infielder Ellie Hubbard, the Badgers ended game two 9-0, this time finishing after the top of the fifth. This adds to an extraordinary total of seven home runs across the eleven innings. The next day, the Badgers proved their wins were not flukes with an 8-0 shutout against St. Thomas. Wisconsin gathered a combined 36-5 score across the weekend series of Arizona Kajikawa Classic games. Acting as the Badgers’ ninth homer of the Classic, catcher Emmy Wells began the lead with a two-run shot. After a double from infielder Ava Kuszak — who hit three RBIs against St. Thomas — and an RBI from Kuffel, the Badgers were winning 7-0, all before the third inning. With an RBI from Kuszak, the Badgers scored one more in the third. Meanwhile, between Magnanimo and relief pitcher Shelby Jacobson, there were six strikeouts, only one total hit and no earned runs in the win. Up next, the Badgers have the Clearwater Invitational in Florida, which promises a more challenging schedule. Wisocnsin will play five games from Feb. 15-17, with four of the five being ranked teams. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo courtesy of WIHEDC STATE NEWS Wisconsin's first Indigenous economic, housing conference aims to boost Native communities Thirty-two Native-owned businesses received $5,000 grant awards at a conference held by the Wisconsin Indigenous Housing and Economic Development Corporation. By Clara Strecker November 14, 2024 | 6:00am CST Wisconsin’s first conference devoted to Indigenous economic and housing development brought entrepreneurs together Thursday and Friday to address gaps in Wisconsin’s Indigenous communities. The two-day conference, hosted by the Wisconsin Indigenous Housing and Economic Development Corporation (WIHEDC), took place in Bowler, Wisconsin, and served as a space for Indigenous entrepreneurs, tribal leadership and economic development professionals to collaborate and share ideas on how to better invest in their communities, for example aiding small businesses and housing initiatives. The event also focused on two studies addressing economic impact and housing needs. Many families in tribal communities live in overcrowded homes, WIHEDC CEO Fern Orie told The Daily Cardinal. The study aims to see what the needs are and develop solutions on how to tackle this crisis, beginning with affordable housing. Economic impact study The WIHEDC is conducting a new project to evaluate and display contributions of “Non-Gaming tribal entities and Indigenous small businesses to the state of Wisconsin,” according to their website. “We did a study, the first of its kind, highlighting all of the Native-owned businesses in Wisconsin and gathering data about what kind of businesses are out there, what kind of work and services they provide and really just gathering it into a native small business directory,” Orie stated. The WIHEDC collected data from tribal corporations, indigenous businesses and nonprofit organizations. To further engage with communities, they also visited tribal reservations. The study will allow the corporation to create a database, which in turn can be used to create economic development and policy initiatives supporting tribal communities in Wisconsin. Orie told the Cardinal she hopes the study will help highlight opportunities in workforce development and encourage investment in Wisconsin’s Indigenous communities. “This was kind of the first swoop of gathering data and pulling in all the non-gaming enterprises from tribes, along with trying to get as many of our Native entrepreneurs to provide data but really showcasing the work, the impact and the landscape out there in tribal economic development,” Orie said. Going hand-in-hand with the economic development plan, the conference was able to provide awards to small businesses. During the conference, 32 Native-owned businesses received a $5,000 business grant award. “It all ties together with opportunity, right? We’re providing opportunities for Native-owned businesses to showcase the work they do,” Orie told the Cardinal. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Wisconsin Native Homeownership Coalition’s housing study The WIHEDC will also conduct the Wisconsin Native Homeownership housing study, an analysis aimed at providing insights into the current state of Indigenous housing development in Wisconsin in order to address housing gaps in Native communities. The coalition is expanding from Wisconsin to the regional Great Lakes states, Orie said. The WIHEDC recognizes the lack of affordable housing in America, which Orie said is amplified in tribal communities, as families already live in congested housing with many extended families living together. “How do we tackle and address these housing challenges? … starting with having enough housing stock to house our families and then addressing affordability. We need affordable housing,” Orie said. The WIHEDC will hold a session at the annual WHEDA conference next week in Madison, where they will present more results from their studies. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Clara StreckerClara Strecker is a copy chief for The Daily Cardinal. She also covers state news. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Irena Clarkowski | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Ald. Juliana Bennett calls for legal reform after report finds insufficient evidence for sexual harassment violations by Ald. Charles Myadze District 2 Ald. Juliana Bennett called for legal reform after a reopened investigation into sexual harassment allegations against District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze found he had not committed workplace harassment. By Ella Hanley November 17, 2024 | 6:35pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. A recent investigation released by the city of Madison found there was insufficient evidence to prove that District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze committed significant workplace harassment, despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them. The incident does not qualify as workplace harassment because Myadze’s behavior did not disrupt the women’s ability to perform their jobs, according to the investigation. One of the women was District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett, who spoke with The Daily Cardinal on Saturday about her mindset once the investigation concluded. “My case was revised because I maintained a professional relationship after Ald. Myadze threatened me,” Bennett told the Cardinal. “Since as a society we condition women to keep the peace, it is common for women to remain cordial in the face of abuse. Our legal system should reflect this nuance.” In a statement released Thursday, Bennett said Myadze made continuous, unwanted and sexually inappropriate advances toward her at a 2022 conference in Washington, D.C. Once she returned home, and he found out she had reported the incident to other alders, he cornered her in his car and threatened her aggressively. “I was paralyzed with fear,” Bennett said in the statement. “Ald. Myadze made it abundantly clear that if I were to speak about this situation again, he would punish me with retaliatory actions on Council.” Three other women came forward against Myadze with similar allegations of unwanted sexual advances and threats, and multiple former partners have accused him of physical assault, including former deputy mayor and mayoral candidate Gloria Reyes. Bennett told the Cardinal that legal reform is in order, sharing how women in these situations are often conditioned to “keep the peace” and remain cordial during abuse. Independent elected officials, such as alders, are not under the same jurisdiction as city employees, according to a statement from Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway. Bennett told the Cardinal the Common Council should include alders under the employee section of the city’s code of conduct, which would create a clearer path to “holding alders that engage in misconduct accountable.” The initial investigation into Myadze conducted Aug. 9 found sufficient evidence of workplace hostility and harassment but was recently revised after Myadze’s attorney requested the case be reopened. Myadze submitted in a written declaration, among other documents, that he believes a “campaign was orchestrated” to discredit him. Myadze has denied all domestic violence and sexual harassment allegations, according to the investigation report, Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email "I fully cooperated with the independent investigation into the various allegations, and I was pleased though not surprised, that the investigator found that none of the complaints against me were sustained by the evidence,” Myadze said in a statement to Channel 3000 Thursday. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan said Myadze’s actions “are unbecoming of an elected official” and called for Myadze to resign immediately from the Common Council. “Elected officials should be held to a higher standard of conduct,” he told the Cardinal. Rhodes-Conway said in a statement Thursday that further courses of action are in the hands of the “public and the political process.” “While such behavior may be normalized elsewhere, I would hope that in Madison we have higher standards," Rhodes-Conway said. Bennett said the “intense power imbalance” and severity of his threats led her to keep silent. “After spending over two years of being afraid of Ald. Myadze or what might happen to me if I went public, I now feel the strength of standing in my truth,” Bennett said. “It’s not easy to stand up, but once you do, the strength and power you feel from being free from abuse is so worth it.” Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Dane County leaders call for Hmong translators, building funds at public hearing Citizens and nonprofit leaders voiced concern over the Dane County budget at a public hearing Oct. 9, calling for increased funding for translators and facilities. By Maria Knaack October 17, 2024 | 5:00am CDT The Dane County Board of Supervisors held a public hearing Oct. 9 for community members to voice budget requests to the County Board of Supervisors. Interim Dane County Executive Jamie Kuhn proposed the new 2025 budget in September, featuring significant cuts from last year’s budget. The proposed budget, totaling $903 million, cuts nearly 7% from 2024, partially in response to the end of pandemic-era federal aid from the American Rescue Plan. During the hearing, members of the public, primarily nonprofit leaders and union members, expressed concern over reduced funding. Many attendees spoke in favor of setting aside funds to hire a Hmong translator at the county level in order to help Hmong speakers access and utilize government programs and assistance. Six members of the Southeast Asian Healing Center (SEAHC), ranging from college students and employees of the center to the elders in need of this assistance, explained how vital services are currently inaccessible to those who do not speak English. “Language barrier is one of our main concerns. . . this role would serve as a vital bridge between Hmong speakers and the local government by ensuring our community is served properly and gets the services that are so needed,” said Doua Vang, executive director of SEAHC. In addition to SEAHC, other leaders of nonprofits expressed concerns over a possible lack of funding. Anne Maestrick, the executive director of Sunshine Place, described her organization as a “resource hub for those facing hardship” that has been recognized as a model agency working towards ending homelessness. Maestrick asked the board to provide $2 million in the budget for Sunshine Place to replace one of their buildings, which, in addition to improving the condition of facilities, would give them more space to add new services, including mental health services. Sun Prairie Food Pantry President Mark Thompson also voiced support for Sunshine Place and briefly advocated for support of the Sun Prairie Food Pantry, but without specific metrics. Members of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees union (AFSCME) also offered a few amendments to the budget that revolved around valuable county locations, including the Dane County Airport, Henry Vilas Zoo and the Alliant Energy Center. AFSCME members discussed adding new employees to these locations, such as janitorial staff, mechanics and events coordinators. They explained these positions could be budget neutral by replacing current positions which are unnecessary or are ending after this year, and they would replace outsourcing that is currently needed. The Board of Supervisors will continue to review and finalize the budget, considering these requests. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “The budget is determined based on the needs of the communities it serves. It is important that members of the community are given the opportunity to contribute at every step of the process,” Chair Patrick Miles stated in an Oct. 1 press release. The finalized budget is scheduled to be released in late October. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
A deer through binoculars. Photo by Nicole Steele | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE The unknown side of hunting: Traditions, overpopulation and conservation What to know about hunting before the whitetail season starts Sept. 14. By Nicole Steele September 13, 2024 | 2:00am CDT It’s that time of year again: the leaves are starting to change color, the days are getting shorter and the temperature is slowly decreasing. Thousands of hunters will be walking the woods on Sept. 14, in search of the elusive whitetail deer, hoping to catch a glimpse of a buck to hang on their walls. Scott Katzenberger, an avid hunter who’s been hunting for more than 40 years in northern Wisconsin, said he still enjoys getting the chance to be out in nature and deepen relationships. “I’ve been able to bond with my high school friends. I think about all the moments that I bonded with my dad and my family. I got to take my son deer hunting for 3 years. I just got married, and now I hunt with my new wife and she loves to go, and it’s a big part of our life,” he told The Daily Cardinal. But there is more to the story of hunting than meets the eye. Hunting is less of a survival use and more of a recreational pastime, according to PETA. The animals suffer in pain during the process of being shot, with the risk of being wounded and suffering even more, the organization argued. Still, Katzenberger said hunters never try to cause harm to wildlife or the land that they hunt on. “I think most hunters have more respect for wildlife and nature than most people realize,” Katzenberger said. “Everything that we hunt and take as game goes across our table as food, [and] everything that we take we have a legal license in order to consume.” Hunting accidents, such as destroying property or unintentionally killing an animal or human, occur frequently each year. Out of around 18 million hunting participants, 4,700 of those were involved in an accident in 2018, according to the National Shooting Sports Foundation. Since the introduction of hunter’s safety courses in Wisconsin in 1967, all hunters in Wisconsin born after 1973 are required to receive a hunter’s safety certification. As a result, incidents have decreased by 96%. The Wisconsin deer population is at an all-time high, according to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Mandatory registration of each deer harvested helps track population trends, and other factors such as weather, the length of the hunting season and the amount of hunters that register affect the population statistics. Katzenberger said that hunting is a great way to reduce overpopulation. “When any animal gets overpopulated, there’s more disease amongst the herd. There’s a lot of evidence [that hunting] keeps the deer herd in check but healthy. And when I say healthy I mean it’s not so overrun that they’re decimating the population of a lot of other game,” he said. Every three years, the DNR releases a map of Wisconsin showing counties with high, maintained and low population density of deer. This can help hunters determine the best counties to hunt in to reduce overpopulation, the counties to not hunt in to increase population and the counties to hunt in to help maintain population. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Overpopulation also has the possibility of increasing traffic accidents. Between 15,000 and 19,000 deer crashes occur annually on Wisconsin roadways, according to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. “[When] your deer population is way out of control, you’re gonna have way more accidents on the highway, and deer hits raise insurance prices,” Katzenberger said. And due to overpopulation across the state, chronic wasting disease (CWD) is becoming more prevalent each year. “Chronic wasting disease is a fatal, infectious nervous system disease of deer, moose, elk and reindeer/caribou. It belongs to the family of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) or prion diseases. CWD occurs only in members of the cervid or deer family — both wild and captive,” Christina Kizewski, a wildlife biologist for the Wisconsin DNR, told The Daily Cardinal. Kizweski said there are some practices hunters can follow in order to slow and control the spread of CWD, including testing deer for CWD by removing the lymph nodes in the neck. The DNR and partner supporters also have many deer carcass dumpsters across the state. Managed hunting plays a large role in the DNR’s conservation and land management efforts, Kizweski said. “It helps keep populations in check and keep a balance on the landscape,” she said. “Without hunting, species populations can grow to unhealthy levels where disease outbreaks can occur more readily and could impact human health and safety.” For people who don’t hunt but would like to support conservation, just purchasing a license can help, Kizweski said. “Hunting license fees are used for habitat management for species, and monitoring and research objectives as well. Even if folks are not interested in harvesting an animal, the purchase of a hunting license contributes financially to landscape level work, which supports wildlife in multiple facets,” said Kizweski. Hunting is more than just the importance of conservation, the reduction in overpopulation or the reduction of diseases, according to Katzenberger. It’s a tradition, an endless part of many families lives that many hope to pass onto future generations. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Tony Casteñeda, center, and his band play a Thursday evening set at the Cardinal Bar Photo by Rowan Fields | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Meet Tony Casteñeda, Madison’s Latin jazz king After five decades, Tony Casteñeda continues to play the genre he jumpstarted in Madison. By Jacob Szczap October 17, 2024 | 4:00am CDT As late afternoon turned to dusk on an October day in Madison, Tony Casteñeda settled into his Thursday evening routine. It involves jamming along on the bongos and congas in the back room of the Cardinal Bar with the five-piece Latin jazz band he leads, the Tony Casteñeda Latin Jazz Band. Thursday is Latin music night at the Cardinal, and keeping rhythm on the drums, Casteñeda’s hands bang away to the Afro-Cuban rhythms while the rest of the band creates an excitingly smooth and exotic sound, bringing the genre of Latin jazz to Madison. “I just love the music, and I love the vibe,” Casteñeda said. Casteñeda, 68, is Madison’s godfather of Latin jazz. He came to the city in 1974 to study at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and in 1977 became a founding member of Olmeca, Madison’s first Latin jazz band. The group played for over 20 years before Casteñeda formed his own group, which has been playing together since 1998. Along the way, he’s forged a path greater than music. A social justice advocate, radio and podcast host and bartender among other gigs, the laid-back Casteñeda is a true jack of all trades. Through a variety of avenues, he has become a true and inviting local figure. Originally from Racine, Wisconsin, Casteñeda got his start in music through his uncle, who played in a Latin orchestra band when he was growing up. When Casteñeda was in fifth grade, his uncle bought him a trumpet, his first instrument. By high school he had a conga drum, teaching himself to beat on to the records of Santana. A few years later when Casteñeda was at UW-Madison, his band Olmeca played on as a live band in the era of disco. With a weekly gig at State Street Infirmary, Olmeca built the foundation for live Latin jazz in Madison. “I wanna say he’s kind of a pioneer,” said Anders Svanoe, the saxophonist in Tony’s band and a leader of multiple other musical groups in Madison, referring to Madison’s Latin jazz culture. “He sort of started that whole scene.” These days, Casteñeda and his band play every Thursday night at the recently reopened Cardinal Bar, with plenty of other gigs scattered in between. This night in the historical bar’s swanky back room, it’s Casteñeda on the bongos and congas, Svanoe belting out melodies and improvisations on the saxophone, Arno Gonzalez providing a Latin percussion flair on the timbales, Dave Stoler bouncing around the keys on the keyboard and Henry Boehm holding the fort down with technique on the double bass. Louka Patenaude also plays with the group, on guitar. In between songs, Casteñeda casually converses with the evening crowd, appearing like there’s nowhere he’d rather be. Before he was Madison’s Latin jazz king, Casteñeda found his footing on the political scene. Arriving in Madison in the mid 1970s, the political climate was still plenty hot on campus. Casteñeda became involved with Mecha, then UW-Madison’s Chicano student organization and fought for a Chicano studies department, which he remembers as a “big struggle.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “There was a lot of political activity at the time,” Casteñeda said. “I’m still involved, and everyone does their part.” Olmeca played together until the late 1990s, and Tony started his own band in 1998, with much of the group still together. The band had a rollicking years-long Sunday night run at the Cardinal, where they would play in front of crowded, cigarette-hazed rooms full of dancers deep into the night. They’ve opened for legendary acts such as Poncho Sanchez and John Santos and have won plenty of local awards. “We’ve been together for a long time, and I really appreciate the loyalty, the commitment that the guys have to the band,” Casteñeda said. At the Cardinal bar, his band seamlessly merged Afro-Cuban rhythms with jazz into a free-flowing, deeply enjoyable sound. Perhaps it’s his laid-back demeanor or his do-anything attitude, but Casteñeda’s decades-long run in Madison has come by no accident. As his invigorating set of Latin jazz came to an energetic end, the Cardinal warmed up. During Latin jazz night, the crowd was fulfilled. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of Sarah Sapp/Flickr SCIENCE Though threat is low, agencies monitor bird flu in Wisconsin as cases rise nationally As of Monday, 21 Wisconsin counties, including southern Barron, Bayfield, Columbia, Rock, Sauk and Jefferson counties, have reported cases of bird flu, affecting a total of around 3.6 million birds since March 2022. By Nicole Steele December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST A highly contagious virus known as Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, or the bird flu, has spread among poultry flocks and affected around 112 million birds since February 2022. Though the bird flu primarily affects poultry, it has been spreading throughout the dairy cattle industry. Common symptoms for poultry include sudden death with no apparent illness, lack of energy or appetite, decrease in egg production, stumbling or diarrhea — however, poultry flocks can also be asymptomatic. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) monitors the amount of commercial and noncommercial bird operations that have been exposed to the bird flu. As of Monday, 21 Wisconsin counties, including southern Columbia, Rock, Sauk and Jefferson counties, have reported cases of bird flu, affecting a total of around 3.6 million birds since March 2022. Among those affected are 17 commercial flocks and 19 backyard flocks in Wisconsin, according to the USDA. All commercial operations were or are being quarantined. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) monitors bird flu in wild bird and waterfowl populations. In some cases, wild birds and waterfowl carry the illness within their gastrointestinal tract without showing signs of sickness, while rare strains can cause severe disease. Symptoms for wild birds and waterfowl include sneezing, coughing, nasal discharge, falling, tremors, circling, abnormal head positions, diarrhea or green colored feces. The risk of humans contracting the virus without animal contact is quite low, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. People exposed to infected or potentially infected animals, or in environments with possible virus exposure, are at higher risk for contracting the bird flu. The current risk of contracting the bird flu for the general public is low, and no human cases have currently been reported in Wisconsin. The first case of avian influenza in dairy cattle in the United States was in March of 2024, and now 15 states and 695 dairy herds have been affected. The first human infection transmitted from a dairy cow in the United States was in April of 2024. There have been 57 total cases of human infection since April, with 34 of those cases being from cattle alone. Human symptoms can range from mild eye infections and upper respiratory symptoms to more severe pneumonia and death. Humans can contract the virus through the nose, eyes or mouth by contact or breathing of air droplets, infected feces, saliva, mucous or touching areas with virus droplets and then touching themselves. The bird flu can also spread to other mammals outside the dairy cattle industry including red foxes, otters, minks and bobcats. These mammals are at risk for ingesting the illness because they scavenge or hunt for birds. The best way to prevent the spread of bird flu is through biosecurity measures, such as reducing visitors, washing hands frequently, wearing disposable boot covers or foot baths, changing clothes before and after exiting flocks and cleaning tools. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison passes property tax referendum On election night, the City of Madison voted to accept a referendum that will raise the property tax levy. By Joseph Panzer November 5, 2024 | 11:43pm CST The city of Madison’s $22 million funding referendum passed Tuesday night. The referendum will raise property taxes above their state limit to close a $22 million deficit for 2025. The deficit would have caused Madison to encounter difficulties with paying the salaries of city employees and continuing providing services to residents. State law prevents cities from raising income taxes or local sales tax to counter shortfalls. The 2023-25 biennial budget passed by the Republican-controlled Legislature contained no increases in funding for shared revenue in Wisconsin, leaving Dane County cities underfunded compared to the rest of the state. Officials in the city government have previously told The Daily Cardinal the blame for this deficit lies with the Legislature and the shift to fiscal conservatism that began under Gov. Scott Walker’s administration in 2010. Wisconsin cities have been unable to increase their tax levies in response to inflation by more than one percent of the city’s total taxable property value since May 2011. "I am particularly grateful that we do not have to consider cuts to essential services that students rely on, such as late-night and weekend busses and public safety," District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told the Cardinal. "These are services that students rely on daily, and I will not let the city compromise on them." Madison is one of the fastest growing cities in the state, according to the Wisconsin Department of Administration, creating concern that an inability to secure funds will result in hiring problems in the city. Though the city has faced a budget deficit for 14 years, the 2025 budget gap would have been the largest seen in years, Madison Finance Director David Schmiedlicke previously told the Cardinal. The average Madison homeowner will pay around $240 more in property taxes annually as a result of this referendum’s passage. Addressing a crowd of reporters at City Hall, Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway gave closing remarks on concerns from residents about the tax hike. “It’s not easy to vote to raise your own taxes, and we should never have been put in this position by the state Legislature,” Rhodes-Conway said. “It’s my commitment to the community that we as the city of Madison — and hopefully in coalition with other cities around the state and other folks who care about cities — will work with the state Legislature to get the investment that we need from the state of Wisconsin into cities.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
The front of Paul's Bookstore on December 3, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Students mourn as Paul’s Book Store closes after 70-year run The independent business announced it will close its doors early next year. By Mia Salbego December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Paul’s Book Store, a beloved fixture at 670 State St. known for its vintage charm and atmosphere, announced on Instagram on Nov. 28 that it will close in early 2025 after 70 years in business. The bookstore’s social media page posted a farewell statement on Thanksgiving, not specifying a reason for the closure but extending thanks to employees and customers. “It’s been an adventure and a labor of love,” read the caption. “And now it’s time to say goodbye.” The shop opened in 1954 by founder Paul Askins and was later taken over by his widow Caryl Askins following his passing in 1975, according to Channel3000. Despite her limited experience in the business of books, her stewardship helped establish the store as a cherished spot on State Street. A short distance from campus, the small, independent bookstore held a place in the hearts of many UW-Madison students. “It’s very different from a Barnes & Noble, it’s very mom-and-pop vibes,” said Avery Doemel, a UW-Madison junior. Doemel remembers the first time she noticed the shop, prior to her first semester at UW. “I was walking down State Street, and I noticed a really cute bookstore,” Doemel recalled. “I really liked the music that they played and how they used vinyls. It sets the mood and gives a whole new feel when you go inside.” Sarah Kissel, a UW class of 1994 alum and current attorney at the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, remembers buying books for her English literature classes at Paul’s Book Store during her time as a student. Kissel expressed disappointment but said she understood the business’s decision. “Part of the reason owning a bookstore is such a grind today is the obvious competition with Amazon,” said Kissel. “How do you compete with being able to open the computer that you keep in your pocket and, in under a minute, order something at a lesser price?” As a Madison community member and mother of a current UW student, Kissel hopes that whatever business moves in to fill the spot on State Street maintains the area’s charm. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I hope that whatever it is, it maintains the continuity of weirdness for State Street,” said Kissel, referring to the book store’s eclectic collection of books and other items. “I hope that it’s somebody new’s dream.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
While UW System administration has no policy on teaching climate change, classes throughout the system utilize date and reference politics to encourage students to become environmentally-conscious. Photo by Channing Smith | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE The influence of social media on climate activism By Hallie Albert and Alexandra Malatesta October 17, 2024 | 2:00am CDT In the wake of catastrophic natural disasters like Hurricane Helene and Hurricane Milton, Florida has become an example of the efforts to combat the devastating impacts of climate change. While thousands grapple with the loss of homes and community, a new generation of voices — Gen Z influencers and political figures — has emerged, using social media to amplify the urgency of this global crisis. Floridians, Georgia and North Carolina fought for their lives as these hurricanes destroyed their homes. The destruction was more than just physical; it left emotional scars for many families and was a “wake up call” that showcased just how badly climate change has evolved. As the debris settles, scientists are delving into data, pinpointing human-caused climate change such as greenhouse emission, deforestation, harmful agricultural practices and more, as a significant factor in why we are having these extreme weather events. Climate change has been an ongoing environmental issue for many years now, and scientists have been warning the world of the consequences it could lead to. Now, we are experiencing these consequences first hand. In a world where the stakes are rising, the influence of social media — particularly through — young, passionate and socially conscious individuals — is where people are able to harness the power of TikTok, Instagram and Twitter to advocate for climate action. Figures such as Greta Thunberg, the Swedish climate activist known for her powerful speeches and school strike movement, have reached millions around the world demanding urgent action on climate change. Her commitment to environmental justice has sparked a global youth movement, demonstrating the power of individual voices in driving collective change. If nothing is done to fight against this problem, the air we breathe will become even more toxic, the storms we face even more destructive. As residents of Wisconsin reflect on the implications of climate change, there are some steps we can take to make a difference: Step 1. Support Local Initiatives — Join local environmental organizations or even just practice clean living. Pick up after yourself and avoid littering. It piles up. Step 2. Reduce Carbon Footprint — Make conscious decisions in your daily life such as reducing single-use plastics and supporting businesses committed to sustainability. Step 3. Educate Others — Use your own social media platform to share information about climate change and encourage others to take action. Take part in a “call to action” because the more we discuss these issues, the more likely we inspire others to act on positive change. As we witness the destruction brought by these hurricanes and other climate-related events, it becomes evident the fight against climate change is more just an environmental one: it is a humanitarian one. We strive for our world to be safe for all generations that come after us. The rise of influencers and their ability to mobilize and inspire change through social media is a sliver of hope, ultimately educating many people. Seeing these hurricanes emerge each year shows just how detrimental climate change is. Luckily, we have the power to help. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Underly's budget proposal is a bold step toward strengthening Wisconsin's public education Underly’s plan, prioritizing special education, per-student funding increases and property tax relief, is a substantial and badly needed investment in the future of Wisconsin. By Maya Morvis November 21, 2024 | 5:00am CST Jill Underly, Wisconsin’s state superintendent, recently unveiled a budget proposal that could make a significant difference for public education in Wisconsin. The proposal, totaling over $3 billion in new funding, aims to address funding gaps that have limited school resources for students, teachers and communities. Underly’s plan, which prioritizes special education, per-student funding increases, property tax relief and grants, is a substantial and badly needed investment in the future of Wisconsin. This proposal represents a chance to build a stronger public education system that will keep pace with rising costs. Underly's plan ties funding increases to inflation, making it easier for schools to maintain quality education without needing local tax increases or frequent referendums to cover basic expenses. By offering state-level support, this proposal will relieve financial pressure on local communities, making funding for education more stable and reliable. It will also advance equitable and inclusive education by significantly increasing special education funding, which would help schools meet state mandates while supporting students with disabilities. For students, these changes would mean better access to essential resources, especially for those in special education programs and low-income households. The proposed increase in the special education reimbursement rate — from 32% to 90% over three years — would provide much-needed funding to cover costs for critical services. This increase would allow districts to offer better support to students with disabilities, enhancing their educational experience and opportunities. The rise in per-student funding would mean schools can improve or maintain essential services, technology, classroom resources and educational programs that benefit all students. Families would also feel the positive effects of this plan. By capping property tax increases to an average of 1.5% over the next two years, Underly’s proposal would help control local tax rates while ensuring that schools still receive necessary funding. For families in low-income brackets, additional financial support for their children in schools through per-student aid increases and the extra 20% in funding for students in poverty would help reduce inequities and offer better educational opportunities. Programs funded through the Out-of-School-Time Grant, aimed at reducing chronic absenteeism, would provide added support to keep students engaged, which is particularly helpful for working families who rely on after-school programs. While Underly's proposal seems promising, some critics argue the increase in state-level funding could shift too much responsibility away from local communities. They argue that local school districts should have more control over their budgets and how money is allocated, rather than relying heavily on state-imposed funding structures. Additionally, some have raised concerns the plan's reliance on capping property taxes may not be sustainable in the long run, potentially leading to future budget deficits or the need for future tax increases to balance the books. While the proposal aims to provide more equitable education, the overall economic feasibility of funding such initiatives without raising taxes in the future remains a contentious issue. However, Underly’s proposal could lead to long-term benefits for Wisconsin’s educational system that outweigh these concerns. With sustainable funding, better resources for students and more financial support for families, the state can work toward creating a more equitable, well-resourced and inclusive education system. This investment in education is an investment in Wisconsin’s future workforce and community, helping ensure that all students have the opportunity to thrive and succeed. Maya Morvis is a sophomore studying Journalism and Political Science. Do you agree that State Superintendent Jill Underly’s budget proposal is good for Wisconsin schools? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Laila Smith | The Daily Cardinal ARTS UW-Madison students are redefining campus as a place for indie film The unique combination of an arthouse theater and the eager spirit of Madison film students sets UW-Madison apart from other schools. By Paige Stevenson November 10, 2023 | 3:00am CST Madison may not look like a city with a swiftly developing film scene, but University of Wisconsin-Madison film students continue to exhibit unmatched spirit and perseverance in their efforts to redefine their community as the place to go for film. Jared Rosenthal, film student and Badger Film Group founder, said Madison’s film community stands out because of the Midwest people and culture that surrounds it. But Rosenthal said what really makes Madison a good place for filmmaking is the fact that its students are able to connect with the community while still staying true to themselves. UW’s Cinematheque, a theater located in Vilas Communication Hall, stands as a physical example of Madison’s position within the film world as the city begins to host a plethora of new film festivals and attract more film students. The Cinematheque screens a large variety of lesser-known arthouse and international movies, ranging from 35mm French classics to high-definition stories from Nigeria. It’s a refuge for filmgoers in a local theater industry decimated by recent closures. “We’ve lost 11 theatrical screens here in Madison, so we at the Cinematheque have sometimes been the only theatrical exhibitors of independent cinema,” said Jim Healy, Cinematheque’s director of programming. For the Cinematheque, this means more of a student presence at their screenings. International, indie films drive Cinematheque’s success Healy believes the draw of the Cinematheque, even beyond the pandemic, is the selection of films offered. “By not being a multiplex cinema that shows whatever is going to make the most money that weekend … means to stand apart from a monolithic culture, and that is represented by international cinema,” Healy said. “Multiplexes don't regularly show movies from Iran or France.” The Cinematheque rarely screens modern, box-office hits. Instead, they focus programming on smaller films that represent the American indie film scene and showcase the success and creativity of international pictures. Every story is unique as each culture and filmmaker approaches their work with diverse perspectives and styles that wouldn’t necessarily appear in more commercially-oriented films. Rosenthal feels exposing student filmmakers to international films illustrates unique film techniques and serves as valuable inspiration for students to push the envelope of film. If students see avant-garde, oddball indie films as successful works of art, they may be more willing to get experimental with their own art and film things they are truly passionate about. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “It all comes down to just creativity and being diligent,” Rosenthal said. “Whether it's international or not, obviously there [are] different values in different cultures and countries. Taking inspiration from any film is going to help create your own style.” These personal perspectives are reflected in film students at Madison. The Cinematheque’s roots in student culture sets it apart from other schools, especially for students like Rosenthal. Much of Madison’s independent film community stems from the school itself and the connections students make with each other through pathways like the Cinematheque and the Madison Film Festival, which Rosenthal launched in August. Their efforts to provide students with a broad, globe-spanning agenda of independent film fosters a desire to learn from different film cultures and forges connections between local and international ideas. “Students understand the culture and what the community needs. It’s about finding the balance between telling your own story and also finding a way to get a community to rally behind that story,” Rosenthal said. Coming-of-age genre films lead Madison’s renaissance The exploration of coming-of-age themes in student productions points to the continuity between student filmmakers and films shown at the Cinematheque. Coming-of-age films explore characters who must grapple with the world they live in, decide what they stand for and how they’ll fight for it. Healy said this can be an extremely isolating experience, especially in a world that praises conformity and silences against-the-grain thinking. “It’s something cinema can portray, not just loneliness … but the idea of standing up against something that seems monolithic and overbearing,” Healy said. Although Rosenthal said plenty of Madison student filmmakers experiment with coming-of-age films, he and others have worked on films about war and jazz, too. No matter what project he’s focused on, he puts all his energy into it — a quality other UW-Madison film students share. These filmmakers have a perspective very similar to the ones depicted on screen, he said, and their work feels more authentic as a result. “At the end of the day, it’s really just make believe with a few cameras, so every story is unique in its own way,” Rosenthal said. “Give it everything you got, and that means fighting through the pain because there are inherent struggles to every single film you make.” Rosenthal knows building Madison’s film reputation will take time. But he’s optimistic that as Madison film students go on to bigger and better things, they’ll give back to the community that supported their success, further cementing Madison as the hot new place for film. Until then, Madison will continue to harbor a plucky indie film scene. “With this unified sense of community effort of creatives coming together here over the last few years … it makes sense why people would want to tell stories and learn and grow here,” Rosenthal said. Maybe this is just because it’s a small, growing community of eager film students with unique perspectives on film, but UW-Madison film students will tell you this is because it represents the key virtue behind indie film: authenticity. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Is everything bigger in Texas? Badgers head to Austin for Bevo Classic Wisconsin will spend their weekend in Austin with matchups against No. 10 Texas, No. 9 Alabama and Texas State. By Annika Bereny March 10, 2023 | 12:04am CST This weekend, the Wisconsin Badgers (10-6) will head south to Austin, Texas for the Bevo Classic, where they will face off against No. 10 Texas, No. 9 Alabama and Texas State. The Badgers will enter Austin hot, coming off of an eight game win streak that has them undefeated since Feb. 19 against Louisville. They most recently picked up an early conference win against Big Ten rival Indiana, beating them 12-1 in Bloomington. The game against the Hoosiers marked Wisconsin’s widest margin of victory all season, adding some extra momentum to their win streak Wisconsin will play their first game of the invitational against Texas State (16-5), where 2022 Sun Belt Freshman of the Year Ciara Trahan leads the Bobcats in hits with 27 on the season and a .386 batting average. Jessica Mullins is expected to start in the circle for Texas State, where she holds a formidable 1.22 ERA over 63 innings pitched. The Bobcats are projected to finish the season second in the Sun Belt, according to a preseason coaches poll. During their Friday faceoff against Texas (18-2-1), the player to watch for the Longhorns will be freshman shortstop Viviana Martinez from Tolleson, Arizona, who leads the team in hits and is currently batting an impressive .524 on the season. Martinez has recorded a hit in all but two of her 21 starts this season. Wisconsin, however, has committed zero errors in their last three games, and the infield will likely be wary of Martinez as a threat at the plate. The Longhorns entered 2023 with unfinished business after making it to the Women’s College World Series final as an unseeded dark horse, nearly winning the National Championship. Texas’ path to Oklahoma City went through No. 13 Washington and No. 4 Arkansas before defeating No. 7 Oklahoma State to advance to the finals. Earlier that season, Texas was the first team to beat softball powerhouse Oklahoma, snapping their 40-game win streak spanning more than 300 days. The three game series for the Championship ended poorly for the Longhorns, though, as Oklahoma avenged their prior loss with 16-1 and 10-5 wins to become back-to-back champions. Last year’s loss is likely fresh in their minds as they chase another bid to Oklahoma City this season and another shot at becoming national champions. In their Sunday matchup against Alabama (19-3), all eyes will be on the Wisconsin offense as they attempt to score against fifth-year senior Montana Fouts, a powerhouse in the circle for the Alabama defense and the most recent SEC Pitcher of the Week. Fouts is coming off a week where she threw 19 shutout innings and pitched her third perfect game — and the program’s eighth. For the Crimson Tide, Kenleigh Cahalan leads the team in batting average, hitting .400 on the season. Ashley Prange is another face to look out for at the plate, leading the team with eight home runs. Cahalan and Prange are eager to hit, though, having eight and six strikeouts on the season, respectively. The Badgers and likely starter in the circle, Gabi Salo, can capitalize on this vulnerability when they face Alabama. For Wisconsin, Katie Keller and Kayla Konwent are expected to continue their dominance, as the two lead the team in batting average at .357 and .348, respectively. Freshman Rylie Crane will also look to extend her hot streak after going 6-8 in last weekend’s Hoosier Classic. In the circle, Salo will aim to build upon her strong showing last weekend, where she recorded a career-high 11 strikeouts against Purdue Fort Wayne, significantly contributing to her 0.69 ERA. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The 2023 Badgers will look to improve upon last year’s 30-21 season that ended against No. 14 Florida in the Gainesville Regional. Already they are showing progress, handing two resounding defeats to Georgia Tech in the ACC/Big Ten challenge who they narrowly defeated in the first round of last year’s tournament, 7-6, to survive elimination. The Bevo Classic will begin on Friday, March 10, with Wisconsin playing their first game against Texas State at 11 a.m. CT. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Why do leaves change colors in the fall? The chemical explanation behind the beauty of fall foliage. By Cassidy Darling October 31, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Ever wondered what exactly causes the leaves to shift from green to yellow, orange and red in fall? Turns out, it all comes down to the naturally occurring pigments and chemical transformations within the leaves. The key pigment is chlorophyll. This molecule turns sunlight into energy for the plant in the process called photosynthesis, University of Wisconsin-Madison chemistry professor emeritus Bassam Shakhashiri told The Daily Cardinal. “The leaves are green because they are giant factories for chlorophyll. Chlorophyll is a green pigment. Other chemicals are there also, but they are masked. They’re hidden by the immense presence of chlorophyll,” Shakhashiri said. Chlorophyll absorbs blue and red light from the sun and reflects green. This reflected light is what we see, causing the leaves to appear green. During the summer, the leaves are rich in chlorophyll as it is necessary to perform photosynthesis. However, the amount of chlorophyll present in the leaves is not constant throughout the year. In the fall, everything starts to change, and chlorophyll is destroyed as the trees prepare for winter. “When the temperature drops down more, the chlorophyll factories begin to shut down,” Shakhashiri said. This is when the other chemical pigments that were previously masked begin to shine through. Carotenoids, one of these pigments, appear yellow due to their absorption of blue and blue-green light. The carotenoids are destroyed at a slower rate than the chlorophyll, turning the leaves more yellow as chlorophyll content decreases. But what about the red and orange leaves we see? These are caused by other pigments called anthocyanins. Some trees create anthocyanins in the late summer and fall in order to prevent damage caused by the slowing of photosynthesis. As chlorophyll production decreases, the leaf can turn less and less of the sunlight it receives into energy, and any extra absorbed sunlight only causes trouble. Anthocyanins act as a shield against sunlight from entering the leaf, preventing damage and also reflecting red light. So, if a leaf has carotenoids and anthocyanins present, it will reflect both yellow and red light, appearing orange. Red leaves occur when the anthocyanin pigment is the only one left. “When these other chemicals begin to be observed, it gives us dazzling views and a very, very impressive panorama of colors,” said Shakhashiri. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The vivid display of colors in the trees in the fall is an illustration of the idea that everything we interact with can ultimately be reduced to the actions of molecules, Shakhashiri said. “It prompts an appreciation for the complexity of the beautiful, chemical world that we live in,” said Shakhashiri. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Courtesy of Beautifulcataya via Flickr STATE NEWS State superintendent calls on Legislature to increase funding for public schools Wisconsin State Superintendent Jill Underly proposed a $4 billion budget increase in state funding to address gaps in K-12 public education. By Maggie Spinney November 15, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wisconsin State Superintendent Jill Underly proposed a $4 billion increase in state funding for her 2025-27 public education budget Monday to address the financial constraints Wisconsin public schools are currently facing. Underly’s proposal targets special education reimbursements, nutrition, mental health resources and teacher retention. Gov. Tony Evers announced a $4.5 billion state surplus in October following the end of Wisconsin’s fiscal year. Evers said the surplus will guide the next two-year state budget, addressing “needs that have been long neglected.” Underly’s call to lawmakers to increase state funding of public education comes at a time when many public schools frequently rely on local referendums to aid in operations and improvements. “Too many of our school districts across the state are forced to go to referendum just to keep the lights on and our teachers in the classroom,” Underly said in a statement Monday. “Our Legislature has woefully underfunded public education to the detriment of our kids and communities.” The new spending would increase the special education imbursement rate from 31.5% to 90%, adding up to $2 billion in the biennium. “These are mandated services and schools need the help,” Underly said. “Our proposal puts us on a path to achieve that goal in the coming years.” Additionally, Underly’s proposal includes a per student increase to revenue limits to $425 in the first year and $437 in the second year, totaling $1 billion over the biennium to provide sustainable funding for Wisconsin public schools. Property tax increases would be limited to an average of 1.5% over the biennium. The proposal includes a $212 increase for aid funding, $20 million to reduce chronic absenteeism and $10 million to reimburse local education agencies for uncovered special education expenses. Rep. Francesca Hong, D-Madison, said in a statement Monday that Underly’s proposal will create sustainable funding for Wisconsin public schools and relieve the financial constraints many school districts, educators and students are facing due to the Legislature’s “austerity.” “The Wisconsin Legislature has the resources our kids need, yet time and time again, legislative Republicans choose to ignore the widening funding gaps that disadvantage our children,” Hong said. “It’s imperative that we move beyond empty promises and take action.” Republican majorities in both the state Assembly and Senate diminished following the Nov. 5 election. This will be the first legislative term under new district maps signed by Evers earlier this year. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email During a news conference following his reelection as Assembly speaker on Tuesday, Rep. Robin Vos, R-Rochester, said the Assembly is “not in a rush” to spend the state’s surplus. Instead, Vos said Republicans will focus on fighting inflation and “putting the money [Wisconsinites] overpaid back in their wallets.” In the past, Republicans have rejected increased state funding for Wisconsin public schools. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Kayla Northway | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin women’s basketball puts out the Flames 61-57 Women’s basketball wins in a nailbiter on Thursday night, junior Serah Williams surpasses 1000 career points. By Elizabeth Jacques November 26, 2024 | 1:39pm CST Wisconsin Badgers women’s basketball had a lot to celebrate after Thursday night’s game against the University of Illinois-Chicago Flames, coming out on top with a four-point victory, 61-57. Junior forward Serah Williams reached 1,000 career points in the Badgers’ win over the Flames. She is the 29th women’s basketball player to achieve this milestone and is the third fastest to do so, achieving it in only 66 games. Williams achieved her milestone in just the first quarter, but she just kept on going. She was the leading scorer of the night, dropping 20 points, to bring her career point total to 1,016. Williams also grabbed 14 rebounds, collecting the 25th double-double of her career. Sophomore center Carter McCray and graduate student guard Natalie Leuzinger helped Williams out with 10 points apiece. The game was a gritty one from both sides. In the first quarter, the teams combined for 21 points, Wisconsin leading 12-9. The Badgers forced three shot clock violations and held the Flames to a low shooting percentage. In the second quarter, it was all Badgers. They were able to keep the Flames to only scoring seven second-quarter points. This number is tied for the 10th fewest in Badgers program history. At the half, the Badgers led 25-16. After the half, it started to light up for both teams. The Badgers, thanks to rebounding, were able to keep their composure. In the fourth quarter, the Badgers led 35-31 in rebounding, which helped them pull away from this game entirely. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin finishes Kajikawa Classic with three straight shutout wins in Tempe The Wisconsin Badgers softball team started their season 4-1 after three phenomenal consecutive takedowns. By Abby Shulman February 14, 2024 | 1:34pm CST The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Boise State Broncos and Maine Black Bears in a doubleheader Saturday, allowing a whopping total of zero runs from their opponents en route to winning each game 9-0. Wisconsin outfielder Brooke Kuffel gave the Badgers an early 1-0 lead in the top of the second against Boise State after mirroring her solo homer from their last game just a day before against GCU. After a slow few innings, the Badgers scored another five runs in the fourth. Catcher Emmy Wells hit a two run homer — her first homerun with the Badgers — and infielder Alivia Bark hit the first homerun of her career, clearing the center field fence. After a couple of sac-flies and yet another homerun from Kuffel in the sixth, the Badgers ended 9-0 for pitcher Tessa Magnanimo’s second career shutout. Magnanimo pitched all six innings, allowing no runs or walks. Wisconsin then swept Maine, improving their all-time record against the Black Bears to 6-0. Outfielder Molly Schlosser set the stage for success after knocking one over the right field fence for a leadoff homer. Taking advantage of Maine’s errors, the Badgers were already up 6-0 by the end of the second. Being one of only seven players in Badgers softball history to record a home run in three straight games, Kuffel continued her hot streak and joined the exclusive list of players to do so. With back-to-back home runs from her and infielder Ellie Hubbard, the Badgers ended game two 9-0, this time finishing after the top of the fifth. This adds to an extraordinary total of seven home runs across the eleven innings. The next day, the Badgers proved their wins were not flukes with an 8-0 shutout against St. Thomas. Wisconsin gathered a combined 36-5 score across the weekend series of Arizona Kajikawa Classic games. Acting as the Badgers’ ninth homer of the Classic, catcher Emmy Wells began the lead with a two-run shot. After a double from infielder Ava Kuszak — who hit three RBIs against St. Thomas — and an RBI from Kuffel, the Badgers were winning 7-0, all before the third inning. With an RBI from Kuszak, the Badgers scored one more in the third. Meanwhile, between Magnanimo and relief pitcher Shelby Jacobson, there were six strikeouts, only one total hit and no earned runs in the win. Up next, the Badgers have the Clearwater Invitational in Florida, which promises a more challenging schedule. Wisocnsin will play five games from Feb. 15-17, with four of the five being ranked teams. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo courtesy of StageQ. ARTS ‘Angry Fags’ gives a hilarious look into the minds of terrorists StageQ’s adaptation of the political comedy offers a cynical view of queerness, electoral politics and murder. By Oliver Gerharz November 14, 2024 | 3:00am CST “Angry Fags” is a campy play full of oddball characters and dialogue that feels human yet hilarious. It’s also about queer sorrow and rage inspired by homophobia and is a dialogue between ideas on how to resist bigotry. "Angry Fags," running at the Bartell Theatre from Nov. 1-16, was put on by StageQ, a Madison organization dedicated to theater covering LGBTQ+ topics. At the start of "Angry Fags," the audience is introduced to Bennet Riggs (Jonah Hirst) and Thomas “Coop” Cooper (Jack Garton) as they share a bottle of wine, joke about their work crushes and use explosives to assassinate a political opponent. After that flash-forward, the first act of the 120-minute play introduces Bennet as a communications staffer on the team of Georgia State Sen. Alison Haines (Molly Maslin). Haines is up for re-election, an incumbent accused of prioritizing her own agenda as a lesbian instead of the needs of the people. On top of political conflict, "Angry Fags" follows a romance between Bennet and Adam (Matt Reines), the chief of staff on Haines’ campaign. Bennet and Adam’s relationship is supported by their coworker Kimberly (Vi Williams) — that is to say, as a married straight woman, she thinks it's hot that two guys are kissing. Kimberly is probably the funniest part of this play, at one point giving Bennet a brief list of gay guys she thinks he should hook up with “for her.” After a day on the job, Bennet returns home and exchanges some very real-feeling banter with his roommate Cooper. Cooper tells Bennet about running into Bennet’s ex-boyfriend Sammy the night before, and the roommates mock Sammy for going home with an unattractive and straight-looking man that night. Then Cooper gets a call that Sammy has been found badly beaten — that man Sammy “went home with” is the prime suspect. The reality shift that happens at this moment is what “Angry Fags” is best at. From this point on, suspense and narrative discomfort slowly build as comedy and tragedy sit side by side and eventually blur together. While his boss sticks to a moderate and politically-conscious response to the attack, Bennet is enraged. He laments the homophobes that perpetuate these attacks don’t fear any repercussions from the gay community. Bennet and Cooper discuss how someone needs to strike fear into their hearts so that they can “protect the tribe” from these attacks. Cooper becomes this protector when he sees Sammy’s attacker outside of a Home Depot and murders him, leading into the play’s second act. Things quickly start to spiral out of control. Bennet and Cooper start to assassinate homophobic public figures, and the play’s central conflict as one between moderation and extremism shines bright through the second act as the roommates kill their homophobic political opponents. This might sound serious, but it cannot be stressed enough that despite an increasingly dark subject matter, "Angry Fags" remains hilarious throughout. The bleak yet queer dialogue between Cooper and Bennet is a constant delight. They fluctuate effortlessly between trivial gossip and where to draw the line when it comes to killing their enemies. Even though the play was originally performed in 2013, the political messaging of the play is relevant in the current political moment — with Haines and her opponent Peggy Musgrove (Renee Reed) in many ways reminiscent of the recent presidential election. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Musgrove, a Black woman running as a republican, is particularly threatening to Haines because she is more of an outsider than Haines. Though Haines was once an activist, she has mellowed out into a part of the political machine in the time she’s been in office. Similar to 2024 presidential candidate Kamala Harris, Haines is reluctant to take an extreme position on anything for fear of losing moderate voters. Some of her campaign staff agree with this stance, but Bennet disagrees in a way that drives him away from the campaign and toward Cooper’s extremism. In one scene, Adam and Bennett briefly discuss their divergent viewpoints on Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, arguing about why she lost. One argues that she failed to win over the electorate because she was tied to Bill Clinton and did not become the feminist icon she would have if she left him. With how this play has been consistently updated to include modern political references, I would be shocked if there was not someday a version of this play where this discussion is more focused on Harris than Clinton. The discussion of Clinton clinging too close to her husband and losing votes from the left maps straight onto Harris clinging too close to President Joe Biden and losing votes from the left. Ultimately, the central dialogue between liberalism and leftist extremism that this play walks the audience through resolves without clarity. Both perspectives are treated rationally and fully argued through, allowing the audience to draw their own conclusions. In the end it is unclear about who is correct on what the best way to achieve their political motivations are. However, it should be noted that while there is a political question at play, there is no doubt as to the moral question — Bennet and Cooper kill too many people for that debate to have two sides. In a 2015 interview with Backstage Magazine, playwright Topher Payne said that “if you can make someone laugh, they listen. And they lean in, and they want to hear more. And once you have that level of engagement, then you can start layering in a message that you want them to take away.” "Angry Fags" embodies its creator’s philosophy. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
VOLLEYBALL Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State Badgers beat Spartans in four sets to finish third in the Big Ten Conference. By Carlos Bello December 7, 2024 | 9:57am CST No. 6 Wisconsin volleyball faced Michigan State at the Fieldhouse on Nov.30 to cap off the regular season and Big Ten play. With third place in the Big Ten already secured, the Badgers still played their starters on senior night, aiming to maintain a high NCAA tournament seed. The Spartans entered the match with a 6-13 Big Ten record and 13-18 overall. They failed to make the Big Ten tournament, so this matchup was their last of the season. Before the game, the Badgers honored seniors Sarah Franklin, Devyn Robinson, Anna Smrek, Julia Orzol, CC Crawford and Carly Anderson. In the first set, Wisconsin started with a 3-1 run, fueled by Spartan errors and a block from Franklin and Robinson. But Michigan State fought back, tying the game at 10-all with a 4-0 run. After head coach Kelly Sheffield issued a timeout, the Badgers responded with a 6-0 run, including two service aces from Crawford and two kills by Franklin. The Spartans narrowed the gap, but another 4-0 run by Wisconsin sealed the first set 25-19. The second set remained competitive, with neither team gaining a significant advantage. The Spartans held a 16-13 lead before the Badgers tied it on Crawford's kill. The teams continued to trade points, with momentum swinging back and forth. At the end of the set, the Badgers were down 23-22, but a 3-1 run gave them a 25-24 lead. The Spartans responded with their own run to take a two-point lead. Franklin answered with a kill, but two kills by Taylor Preston of the Spartans secured a 28-26 set two win for Michigan State. Wisconsin came out strong in the third set, building a 13-8 lead through two 3-0 runs. The Badgers maintained control, chaining points together while keeping Michigan State from going on any runs. The Spartans weren't done, though, as they fell behind 21-12 but went on a 5-0 run to get back in striking range. But, after a Sheffield timeout, the Badgers stopped the Spartans' momentum and won the set 25-19. Michigan State jumped to an early 5-2 lead in the fourth set. The Badgers responded with an 8-1 run featuring multiple kills from Franklin, an ace, block and kill from Orzol and multiple assists and a kill from freshman setter Charlie Fuerbringer. Wisconsin controlled the remainder of the set, chaining multiple points together and not allowing the Spartans to gain momentum. A kill from junior middle blocker Carter Booth sealed the set and match for the Badgers, 25-18. On senior night, the veterans shined. Franklin and Orzol led the team with 23 and 13 kills, respectively. Orzol, Crawford and Franklin each recorded multiple aces. Booth led all players with nine blocks, while Fuerbringer notched a season-high six. Saige Damrow continued her strong late-season play with a match-high 19 digs. The Badgers now turn their attention to the NCAA tournament, where they secured the No. 2 seed in the Lower Right Region. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Column: Wisconsin football hits rock bottom as 2024 season comes to a close
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE Wisconsin communities are fed up with government inaction on water contamination When Jeff Lamont attended high school 60 years ago, a local company that produced military-grade firefighting foam would invite science classes to practice extinguishing fires. Now he fights water contamination. By John Ernst October 24, 2024 | 5:00am CDT When Jeff Lamont attended high school in Marinette, Wisconsin 60 years ago, a local company that produced military-grade firefighting foam would invite science classes to practice extinguishing fires, including his. The company would set off accelerants, Lamont and his classmates would extinguish the fires with the foam, and fire hoses would wash away the residue. But it wasn’t just science classes that were practicing these techniques. Companies would test their foam on open ground without containment, leaving leftover foam to seep into the ground, flooding nearby rivers and streams with contaminants. This process continued for decades. The main contaminants in this foam were per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAs), which have been detected in wells all over the state. Known as “forever chemicals,” PFAs are manufactured chemicals that break down very slowly over extended periods of time, commonly found in firefighting foam, other chemical manufacturing and even household items such as nonstick cookware or shampoo, according to the EPA. In 2017, Tyco, which has since been bought by Johnson Controls, first reported to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that they had found PFAs in their private wells. Lamont told The Daily Cardinal the company asked to test him and his neighbors wells in Peshtigo and found unsafe levels of PFAs. The findings led Lamont and a few other community members to form S.O.H2O or Save Our Water, an organization that worked to inform the public about the toxicity of PFAs and pressure the state for groundwater, drinking water and surface water standards. Lamont, who is a retired hydrologist and has investigated water systems throughout his career, dug deeper. While looking at the Tyco reports and DNR investigations, most of which centered around the safety of the accelerants used to start fires, he discovered that Tyco first found PFAs in their wells in 2014 but didn’t alert the DNR for another three years. “They allowed the citizens in this community to drink that contaminated water for three years before they notified the DNR of it,” Lamont said. Save Our Water took the fight to the Wisconsin Capitol, where there are signs of slow progress, Peter Burress, the government affairs manager for Wisconsin Conservation Voters, told the Cardinal. He and his organization have worked closely with Lamont and Save Our Water. After Marinette found PFAs in their wells, more voluntary testing and community pressure led to cases of PFAs springing up all over the state. In August 2022, the DNR proposed new PFAs standards for drinking water, groundwater and surface water, including a 20 parts per trillion restriction on drinking water and groundwater as well as an eight parts per trillion cap on surface water. Only the latter passed with some restrictions, and the voting Natural Resources Board, primarily appointed by former Gov. Scott Walker, agreed on a 70 parts per trillion cap on drinking water. The Board shot down a groundwater restriction entirely. The state has never had standards on PFAs in groundwater, the source of drinking water for two-thirds of Wisconsin residents, according to Burress. “Many of those communities who are first impacted and have been dealing with this issue the longest are still fighting for a groundwater standard,” Burress told the Cardinal. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email A second attempt to pass groundwater standards late last year was halted by the REINS Act, a piece of Walker-era legislation that requires state legislative authorization of administrative rules that carry compliance and implementation costs of $10 million or more over a two-year period. In May 2023, GOP lawmakers in the Legislature’s budget-writing committee set aside $125 million for a fund to sponsor the removal of PFAs. But the money has sat in the fund as lawmakers from both sides of the aisle have been unable to agree on the proper way to release the funds to the DNR. With the funding frozen, citizens continue to suffer. From Burress’s perspective, previously gerrymandered districts that have since been revised by Gov. Tony Evers will be the key to progress. Citizens will be more responsive to their legislators with fairer districts, he said. “We know that safe drinking water is popular. If you talk to any legislator, they'll say, ‘I support a clean environment,’” Burress said. “A near supermajority in this Legislature has been able to completely ignore what folks across the state from both sides of the aisle are demanding.” The federal government is unable to assist with any of the groundwater standards that many organizations hope will be passed, but Burress said the Biden-Harris administration has also been instrumental in the effort. In April, the EPA announced the first-ever national drinking water standard for six types of PFAs, capping the two most common, PFOA and PFOS, at four parts per trillion . The standard will give communities three years to test their water and inform the public, with systems needing to implement solutions to decrease PFAs in their drinking water in the next five years — a “huge step,” Burress said. “These are the first new drinking water standards established by the EPA in 27 years, which is wild, and they got it done,” he said. But back in small communities like Marinette, the wait for funding has dragged on for so long, residents are simply tired of fighting, according to Lamont. “[Residents] just want it to be over,” Lamont said. ”It's unfortunate, but that's kind of the blue collar mentality we have in this community. [We]'ve been fighting for six or seven years and look, it's gotten us nothing.” Still, Lamont, Buress and other advocates persist, hopeful to bring change with the upcoming November elections. Groundwater standards and a counter to the REINS Act to release funding will be on the agenda. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Can the Badgers maintain their hot start as they enter Big Ten play? Predictions for the remainder of the Wisconsin men’s basketball regular season. By Daniel Desmond December 3, 2024 | 5:13pm CST The Badgers men’s basketball team is off to a surprising 8-0 start to begin the year and are currently ranked No. 11 in the most recent AP Poll. With a blowout win against Arizona and commanding victories over the University of Central Florida and the University of Pittsburgh to win the Greenbrier Tip-Off Tournament, the Badgers have an impressive early season resume. The Badgers are now set to enter their toughest stretch of the season, with their Big Ten conference schedule beginning at home against Michigan on Dec. 3. What to expect from the newly expanded Big Ten this year Oregon, Washington, UCLA and USC are all playing their inaugural seasons as members of the Big Ten conference. These new schools add to an already competitive year in the Big Ten, which is currently the only Division I conference where every team has five or more wins to begin the year. Additionally, 11 teams in the conference have one or no losses so far. Like the Badgers, Oregon is also off to a hot 8-0 start and are currently ranked No. 12 in the AP Poll. No. 8 Purdue, the consensus preseason favorite to win the Big Ten, are off to a strong 7-1 start. Before the season, Kevin Sweeney of Sports Illustrated predicted Rutgers would finish sixth in the Big Ten partly because the Scarlet Knights are led by Dylan Harper and Ace Bailey, two potential top-five picks in the upcoming NBA Draft in 2025. Overall, the Big Ten will be highly competitive, and there are no “layup” games for any team. What to expect from the Badgers in Big Ten play Last season, the Badgers’ Big Ten conference schedule was a grind. Wisconsin went 11-9 and had a stretch where they lost seven out of nine games. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email But this year’s roster is entirely different as Wisconsin lost and replaced eight players during the off-season. Despite the majority of the team having never played with each other before this season, Wisconsin’s offense is off to a tremendous start. The Badgers average 80.3 points per game, the 23rd highest average in the country. They lead the nation in free throw percentage (86.4%) and have the 19th highest offensive rating in the country, according to KenPom. Missouri transfer John Tonje has been the star of this potent Badgers offense. Tonje, who was named Big Ten Player of the Week the last two weeks, is averaging 22.9 points per game — the eighth highest out of any player in college basketball. Will the Badgers be able to maintain their high-level offense during Big Ten play? “It’s a long season. We’re not even a quarter of the way through it,” head coach Greg Gard said in a press conference following the team’s win over Chicago State on Saturday. “We'll get ready to jump into Big Ten play." When asked about tough shooting stretches and the offense becoming stagnant, Gard said, “Just keep playing, right?” “You know, there are gonna be ebbs and flows to the game. You make sure that you take care of the ball. But make sure you're getting the right shots,” he said. According to TeamRankings, the Badgers turn the ball over at the 14th lowest rate and have the 18th best turnover-to-assist ratio in the country. As experience with the Big Ten gauntlet has taught Gard and his staff, if the Badgers continue to have efficient possessions and maintain their low turnover rate, the offense can continue their success as they make their way through the conference schedule. Concerns ahead for Badgers on the road Last year, the Badgers went 3-9 on the road and shot 11 of their 14 lowest field goal percentages of the season at opposing and neutral sites. The Badgers have yet to take on an opponent’s home court this year, and their first big test will be this Saturday in Milwaukee against No. 5 Marquette. Later on in the season, the Badgers have a slew of really tough conference away contests. Strong performances on the road against Rutgers on Jan. 6, Purdue on Feb. 5 and Michigan State on March 2 will be pivotal to the Badgers’ hopes of winning a Big Ten regular season title. With the 18-team expansion of the Big Ten, the Badgers will travel all the way out to Southern California to take on both the University of Southern California and the University of Los Angeles in January. Big Ten play is always a challenge and there will be bumps along the way. However, if the Badgers can maintain their dominant offense and have players close out games in big moments on the road, this team has the potential to be atop the Big Ten standings and poised for a potential run in a Big Ten and NCAA tournament in March. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball sits at .500 after the Mary Nutter Collegiate Classic The Wisconsin Badgers softball team won four of their six games in Cathedral City, California, improving their record from 4-6 to 8-8. By Abby Shulman February 25, 2024 | 9:59pm CST With two split doubleheaders and one fully successful doubleheader in California at the Mary Nutter Collegiate Classic, the Wisconsin Badgers softball team improved their record to 8-8 by the end of their West Coast trip. The Badgers broke their losing streak with a close, low-scoring game against the Oregon State Beavers on Thursday, winning 3-2. Starting off trailing but stealing the win in the seventh, Wisconsin reversed their start-strong-then-trail-behind routine from the last tournament. While Wisconsin failed to score in the first three innings — no thanks to a series of fly outs and strikeouts — the Beavers solo homered in the first and scored again in the second due to a sequence of walks from Gabi Salo. The Badgers cleaned up their game shortly after getting a run back in the fourth when catcher Emmy Wells, infielder Ellie Hubbard and catcher Emily Bojan all singled, followed by a ground out from infielder Ava Kuszak. Their deficit was split in half with a score of 1-2. While the Beavers had a dry rest of the game, the Badgers took the lead after trailing throughout the game. Infielder Alivia Bark scored off of OSU’s error, and just as the Badgers have thrived off of homeruns this season, outfielder Peyton Bannon blasted the ball over the left field fence to take the lead. The Badgers ended up splitting the doubleheader in another close, low-scoring game, losing in the seventh 2-3 to the No. 11 Missouri Tigers. After a Tiger scored off of Tessa Magnanimo’s wild pitch, Magnanimo locked in to ensure no hits came throughout the next five frames. After an unlit few innings, Kuszak crushed her first homerun of the year, tying the game 1-1 in the fifth. The Badgers filled the bases during the sixth, but the Tigers escaped with a strikeout. Finally, Magnanimo was forced out of the game in the top of the seventh when Mizzou scored a single, leading 2-1. Shelby Jackson’s wild pitch run led to an insurance run for the Tigers. The Badgers got one run back from Bannon in the bottom of the seventh but fell short of a victory after a strikeout. Badgers notch another split double-header on Friday The Badgers prevailed in a series of shutouts at the beginning of the season, and they stole that groove back with a shutout Friday against the San Diego Toreros, winning 8-0. The Badgers had control of the whole game, with Wells establishing the team’s dominance in the second with a solo homer, her fourth home run of the season. The Badgers only struck out twice throughout the game, with their highest scoring frame coming from three runs in the fifth from infielder Danielle Lucey, Kuszak and outfielder Marytherese Nevin. Salo thrived throughout the entire runaway victory, only allowing two hits while striking out seven. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Badgers lost 2-10 in the five-inning second game of the day to the No. 1 Oklahoma Sooners, who came in with a 63-game winning streak. Pitcher Shelby Jacobson started strong in the first but fell in the second, giving the Sooners a 2-0 lead. The Badgers caught up in the next couple of innings, tying the game 2-2 with RBIs from Bark and catcher Hilary Blomberg. Jacobson threw another clean frame during the bottom of the third. The Badgers kept up with the Sooners until things fell apart in the bottom of the fourth. Magnanimo took over but allowed eight runs, cut short by the run rule. With an uneventful final inning, the Badgers lost 2-10. Badgers triumph Saturday in a shutout followed by a win against a ranked team The Badgers started off their Saturday doubleheader with a 4-0 win against the Long Beach State Sharks, their sixth shutout of the season. Wisconsin carried off the lead 2-0 in the second, with RBIs from Hubbard and Bojan, followed by an RBI from Bark in the third — her eleventh RBI of the season. Bark drove in the Badger’s last run of the game in the fifth, while Jacobson secured no runs from the Sharks. Wisconsin allowed the Sharks just one hit all game. The Badgers closed the Mary Nutter Classic with their first win against a ranked team and their second win of the day, beating the No. 20 Utah Utes 4-2. For the first four innings, the only run scored was from Utah in the second thanks to multiple singles off of Magnanimo. Both teams scored one run in the fifth, with outfielder Bree Mitchell scoring for the Badgers to push the score to 1-2. Wisconsin recovered and took charge in the sixth, scoring three runs. Wisconsin won 4-2 after an RBI from Blomberg, a remarkable two-run homer from pinch-hitter Fiona Girardot and a clean frame for Magnanimo in the seventh. After a rollercoaster of a tournament in California, Wisconsin sits at .500. They will take the field again at the Utah Tech Invitational on March 1-3 in St. George, Utah, which will include a three-game series rematch against the Utes. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
UW student and singer-songwriter Christa Lee performs at Memorial Union on October 4, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by David Saddler | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Indie music meets UW-Madison spirit in Christa Lee Senior Christa Klais, better known as singer-songwriter Christa Lee, spoke with The Daily Cardinal about balancing school and music. By Madeline Wooten October 30, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Working toward dreams and passions while in college may be a challenge to some, but University of Wisconsin-Madison senior Christa Klais learned how to balance her school and music career gracefully. While pursuing her bachelor’s degree, Klais has found success writing and performing music under the name Christa Lee. Since the age of two, Klais knew exactly who she wanted to be when she grew up — a singer. “I grew up loving [music]. My mother was a singer, so I always loved it and had a passion for it,” Klais said. “It always felt like my soul lived in music.” She auditioned for every opportunity she could get to sing in school and was raised with an “adoration” of music and artists from the 1980s. Amy Winehouse, Prince, Raye, Remi Wolf and Harry Styles inspired Klais. As her sound changed, so have her influences. Now, Klais admires Chappell Roan, Kali Uchis, Doja Cat, Faye Webster, SZA and Clairo. Klais reflected on her live performances this year as she performed her songs at the Memorial Union concert series on Oct. 4 with music artist Rosie Tucker. “It felt so good and natural. I had just been waiting to do it for such a long time,” Klais said about performing in front of a live audience. “It felt like my soul had a release of some sort because this is what I’ve been dreaming of my whole life.” Klais recently performed alongside UW-Madison a capella group Under A-Rest for a “Artists for Abortion Access” event series Oct. 24. Maintaining a work-life balance as a college student is no easy feat, and sometimes school makes Klais’ music take a pause to put school first. But outside of midterms and exams, Klais finds time to focus more on her music and creating sound. “It can be hard to be in a space where academics and sports are taken so seriously but the arts feel overlooked,” she said. “For me, it can definitely feel like I’m behind on both at all times, but in reality, I’m doing it, and it’s something I’m proud of.” Klais has big things coming as she continues working on unreleased songs, hoping to eventually release an album to take her audience “on a journey of an extended piece and tell a story,” she said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Despite possible judgment from peers, Klais continues to follow her dreams. She’s trying to make her mark as a musician even “in an environment where it is hard to feel like art is appreciated and worthy of taking up space.” she said. “It’s in those moments that I really choose myself and my dreams and make my innermost self proud and excited for more,” she said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Students prepare for "Pride and Prejudice," running through Nov. 17. Courtesy of University Theatre. ARTS UW-Madison ‘Pride and Prejudice’ breathes new life, feminism into an Austen classic “Pride and Prejudice” is showing at the Ronald E. Mitchell Theatre through Nov. 17. By Britta Sevcik November 14, 2024 | 4:00am CST It can be difficult to rework a 200-year-old novel for university students. But director and co-adaptor Ann M. Shanahan and co-adaptor and costume designer Aly Amidei’s adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice” brought a new lens to the play, enrapturing the audience in this romantic classic. In an interview with The Daily Cardinal, Shanahan said she appreciates all of the novel’s past adaptations, but “none of them felt like they spoke to what resonates with me about the novel.” For Amidei, this meant a deeper focus “on the unapologetic nature of the women characters,” particularly showcasing how “they stand with both feet on the ground, and they stand in their truth, and they voice their truth in a way that is startling for me, even 200 years later,” she said. All of the actresses, supporting and leading, take on the role of narrator at some point. Passing around the role of narration kept the audience on its toes, replicating the role gossip plays in past and present society. The strength of the play’s female characters was on full display. Although our world looks very different from Austen’s, certain themes still remain relevant today. “Even though it's dealing in a lot of weddings and couplings, it's the voice, the strong voices that make it feel like you can relate to it,” Shanahan said. This was especially communicated by AJ Stoffel’s portrayal of Elizabeth Bennet. Between her convincing recitation of Jane Austen’s hefty dialogue paired with her use of physical comedy and facial expressions, she perfectly portrayed a headstrong Elizabeth Bennet. But no actresses portrayed comedy quite like Amelia Echmeier’s Caroline Bingley and Nora Wondra’s Mrs. Bennet. These ladies delivered lines that had me doubled over in laughter throughout the play. Both co-adaptors felt this play held a strong relevance today. “Pride and Prejudice” continues to still garner popularity in every generation. The cast themselves proved this throughout the production. “There's one person we cast who was named Eliza for Eliza Bennett,” Shanahan said. “[We] had another person who auditioned whose parent's first date had been going to see a movie version of the play.” The costuming of this production posed the unique challenge of capturing the essence of the original novel but in a way that has not been overdone. Amidei, who in addition to her role as co-adaptor also designed the costumes, said the design choices she made not only had to support the story but to work at “shaping the story.” Amidei said sourcing for a period piece was challenging, as they had to borrow, make and buy different items to piece together the costumes for this show. And “because of shows like Bridgeton, and the popularity of Austen in general, you can even straight up order something from Amazon,” she said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Amidei also explained the process of practicing in period costumes by providing practice garments for the actors — the men wore jackets during rehearsals to work on posture, and the women practiced walking in petticoats. Another unique aspect to their adaptation is the use of dance in propelling the storyline forward. The play features multiple balls and dance is used to showcase the emotion of the characters and draw the viewers further into the world of Austen. “That was your Facebook, your social, your TikTok, your Tinder of the Austen era, right?” Amidei said. Choreographer Kristen Rollins had never choreographed for an Austen work before but took the challenge of choreographing the balls in stride. “The dances are just great. They're the best parts of this show,” Shanahan joked. Each week when the actors had dance rehearsals Shanahan was surprised by how enthralled the company became, especially the young men. These balls still held significance, “almost like a square dance, [they] had this timeless kind of identification.” Shanahan shared. The real star of the show was the way in which everything worked together as a unit. Between the actors, choreography and technical execution the company produced a beautiful twist on a timeless tale. “The work of the students on stage, all of them together as an organism, it's astounding,” Amidei said. “Pride and Prejudice” will run from Nov. 8 to Nov. 17 at the Ronald E. Mitchell Theatre in Vilas Hall. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of A24 ARTS ‘Priscilla’ throws a chair at Elvis’ sanitized reputation By Bryna Goeking November 30, 2023 | 4:00am CST It was hard to be online in 2022 without seeing pictures and videos of Austin Butler’s take on Elvis Presley, a movie aptly titled “Elvis” for its focus on the rock ’n’ roll megastar’s rise and fall. Few people talk about “Priscilla,” both the movie and the forgotten woman in Elvis’s life. Elvis Presley is undeniably an American icon of music, film and pop culture — but the Elvis renaissance of 2022 cast aside many dark aspects of his life, aspects which left undeniable, lasting impacts on those around him. “Priscilla” tells the story of the marriage between Elvis Presley and Priscilla Beaulieau-Presley. While Baz Lurhman’s biopic glosses over the questionable parts of their love affair, director Sofia Coppola embraces it in full force. The story was adapted from Beaulieau-Presley’s 1985 biography “Elvis and Me,” following the 14-year love affair between herself and the King. Fourteen is an important number in this story as it was Priscilla’s age when she first met and was pursued by Elvis. More than just an Elvis exposé, “Priscilla” is the story of finding yourself as a young woman in an abusive relationship. It offers a fresh perspective on the biopic genre by telling the story of a woman often forgotten. The film runs from start to finish with beautiful cinematography, sound and performances. Cailee Spaeny, who plays the titular character, perfectly embodies the innocence of childhood while falling for the most famous man in the world. Her demure, soft voice and petite character are perfectly juxtaposed with Jacob Elordi’s extreme height as Elvis. Following the Elvis renaissance led by Baz Luhrman’s 2022 biopic, “Priscilla” could not have come at a better time. Luhrman’s retelling focused on the glamor and theatricality of Elvis’ life, glossing over the problematic aspects, including how Elvis stole music from Black musicians and pursued a relationship with a teenage girl. “Elvis” portrays Priscilla like many women in history — the passive, soft-spoken, agreeable bride — until the end of their marriage. Rarely do we see Priscilla outside of a conversation with Elvis. It’s true that “Elvis” is meant to focus on Elvis’ life and his relationship with his manager Colonel Parker, but a biopic just shy of three hours fails to give Priscilla any real autonomy. “Elvis” casts her as nothing more than an accessory. Priscilla met Elvis when she was 14-years-old and moved into Graceland with him before her 18th birthday. Throughout “Priscilla,” we see a young girl struggling with a sense of identity in a world that defines her by her relationship with such a famous figure. She even struggles to define herself as an individual. Elvis is constantly asserting his power over her — choosing what she wears and how she does her makeup — and throws a chair at her when she verbalizes disagreement. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email By the end of the movie, it’s hard not to feel suffocated. Watching Priscilla leave Graceland at the end of the movie feels like a breath of fresh air, the start of a new life. So is “Elvis” or “Priscilla” the best retelling of this American love story? There’s not one answer. They were created to tell separate stories. But “Priscilla” tells the story often forgotten, a story of girlhood, growing up and the dark sides of fame. For that reason, “Priscilla” is a more necessary story than “Elvis.” Very few live a life comparable to that of Elvis, but many young women can relate to the story of an abusive partner who may have taken advantage of their age and innocence. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Bryna GoekingBryna Goeking is an arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She also reports on campus news. Follow her on Twitter @BrynaGoeking. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of the International Crane Foundation SCIENCE Ride in style with new ‘Cranes of Wisconsin’ license plate Last month, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation released a new “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate, with purchases directly supporting the International Crane Foundation’s work in the state. By Kayla Northway November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wisconsinites can now purchase the new “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate featuring two species of cranes native to North America and Wisconsin: the sandhill crane and the endangered whooping crane. Wisconsin artist Jay Jocham designed the plate, and strives to raise awareness for endangered wildlife and habitats through his art. For over 37 years, he has created art that has helped conservation groups fund programs to protect wildlife. Jocham has done work for the International Crane Foundation previously, including a series of six murals totaling over 1,100 feet in 2020, which are displayed at the International Crane Foundation’s headquarters. Sandhill cranes and whooping cranes are two crane species found in Wisconsin and throughout North America. It’s estimated that there are at least 40,000 sandhill cranes in Wisconsin and their population is steadily increasing. Historically, whooping cranes were hunted for hat-making, trophy hunting, museum collections, sustenance and recreation. In the early 1900s, settlers also overtook the crane’s wetland breeding grounds and native prairies for farming, leaving whooping cranes on the brink of extinction with only 21 individuals left in the wild. Fortunately, that number has since grown to approximately 836 whooping cranes alive today. Whooping cranes are still endangered, but their rise in numbers is largely due to the International Crane Foundation’s conservation efforts to reintroduce an experimental flock of whooping cranes to Wisconsin’s wetlands starting in 2001. Known as the Eastern Migratory Population, this population hosts nearly 80 whooping cranes to date. For each ‘Cranes of Wisconsin’ license plate purchased and subsequent annual registration, the International Crane Foundation will receive a $25 tax deductible donation. Funds from the license plate will support two of the foundation’s “key projects” in Wisconsin: the continued efforts to reintroduce the whooping crane and the resolution of crop damage caused by sandhill cranes. “The issue of crop damage by cranes is one of great importance here in Wisconsin,” Dr. Rich Beilfuss, president and CEO of the International Crane Foundation, said in a statement. “Our Wisconsin team is working hard to ensure that farmers get the help they need through in-the-field farmer outreach and policy advocacy. This Cranes of Wisconsin license plate will further that mission.” The International Crane Foundation has a nearly 300-acre headquarters in Baraboo, Wisconsin, as well as offices and staff all around the globe, including China, Uganda, Kenya, Zambia, South Africa and Texas. The Foundation works worldwide to conserve cranes and the ecosystems, watersheds and flyways on which they depend by providing knowledge, leadership and inspiration to engage people in resolving threats to cranes and their diverse landscapes. In Wisconsin, the most commonly reported crop damage by sandhill cranes is feeding on recently planted corn seed. According to Sandhill Crane Ecology & Damage Management, when large flocks of cranes feed on planted fields, the damage they cause to an unprotected crop can be severe enough to force the farmer to replant the entire field. Sandhill cranes are experts at using their long beaks and finding planted agricultural seeds such as corn. They remove individual corn seeds within the first few weeks after planting and continue to feed on the germinating seed until the corn plant reaches four to eight inches in height. The International Crane Foundation has worked in Wisconsin’s agricultural communities for three decades to resolve the issue of crop damage by cranes, and it was especially instrumental in field-testing to prove the effectiveness of Avipel seed treatment, a non-toxic deterrent that prevents cranes from consuming freshly-planted corn seed, the news release said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email To purchase the International Crane Foundation’s “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate and see what vehicles qualify, please visit Wisconsin Department of Transportation’s website. For more information about the International Crane Foundation and how you can help, please visit: https://savingcranes.org/. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin The Department of Education forms the foundation of Wisconsin’s education system. Trump shouldn’t dismantle it. By Maya Morvis December 5, 2024 | 4:00am CST President-elect Donald Trump’s call to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education may sound like a bold move toward decentralizing control and restoring local power. But for Wisconsin’s public schools, it’s a risky proposition that could destabilize the very foundation of our education system. The Department of Education plays a crucial role in ensuring equitable access to resources for K-12 schools and higher education institutions. Without it, Wisconsin could face significant challenges that would further deepen the divide between wealthy and underfunded districts, particularly in rural areas. Federal funds, including Title I aid for low-income schools and special education funding, are critical to Wisconsin’s educational system. These programs help ensure that schools with the most need are able to offer a fair and equal education for all students. If Trump’s plan to eliminate the department comes to fruition, this funding could be at risk, forcing local districts to pick up the slack. In a state where education funding is already a hot-button issue, this would likely lead to budget cuts, teacher layoffs or tax increases to cover the loss. Low-income students, students of color and those in rural areas would be hit hardest, losing access to programs and support that help level the playing field. Moreover, eliminating the department would create a patchwork of state and local education policies, potentially leading to a fragmented educational experience for Wisconsin’s students. National standards on testing, teacher qualifications and school safety regulations would vanish, leaving each state to determine its own rules. This could create a situation where students in Wisconsin’s wealthier districts continue to receive high-quality education, while those in underfunded areas are left behind. Inconsistent policies would also make it harder for families to navigate the educational system and ensure that their children are receiving a fair education. The impact on higher education would also be felt across the state. Many Wisconsin students rely on federal student aid, including Pell Grants and student loans, to attend college. If the Department of Education is dismantled, tuition rates could skyrocket, and colleges may become less accessible for low-income students. Furthermore, the department enforces Title IX protections for students against discrimination, ensuring that all students, regardless of gender, are treated equally. Without this protection, Wisconsin’s colleges and universities could face increased legal challenges and potential violations of students’ rights. Proponents of the plan argue that eliminating the Department of Education would give states and local communities more control over their educational systems. They claim that federal oversight stifles innovation and imposes a one-size-fits-all approach that doesn’t work for every state. Advocates for local control, including Trump’s supporters, believe communities have a better understanding of their needs. They also argue that federal overreach has led to the politicization of education, with national mandates like Common Core stifling local decision-making. While this argument holds some merit, it ignores the larger issues of equity that exist within Wisconsin’s education system. The federal government’s involvement ensures that low-income districts and rural areas have access to the same resources as wealthier, more urban areas. Local control can work well for some districts, but it can also widen the gap for those that need support the most. Rather than eliminating the Department of Education, a better approach would be to reform it, making it more responsive to the needs of local communities while still ensuring that equity and accessibility remain at the forefront of educational policy. Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin’s students and educators. The risks of cutting off federal funding, creating fragmented policies and undermining higher education outweigh the potential benefits of local control. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If we truly want to ensure that every student in Wisconsin has access to a high-quality education, we must look at ways to strengthen, not dismantle, the institutions that support it. Our students deserve better than the uncertainty that would come from eliminating the very agency that guarantees their right to an equitable education. Maya Morvis is a sophomore studying journalism and political science. Do you agree that the Department of Education is necessary for Wisconsin schools? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
THE BEET Return of the redlines: Wisconsin Republicans silently celebrate victory with new legislative maps By Omar Waheed February 22, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Redlining returns as Wisconsin Republicans have reversed course on stance against new maps after they realized it brings back 1900s segregation — which was their plan all along. On Monday, Feb. 20, Democratic Gov. Tony Evers signed new legislative maps after months of contention between Democrats and Republicans. After looking at the new maps, state Republicans have fallen silent after Democrats once again gave them exactly what they wanted without working for it. “These new maps are a victory — not for any political party, but for our state and for the people of Wisconsin, who have spent a decade demanding more and demanding better from their elected officials,” Evers said in a tweet celebrating the achievement. “This is a game-changing moment that will define our state’s future.” Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, responded with a crying laugh emoji under the Evers’ tweet before quickly deleting it. Vos, after failures to impeach new liberal Supreme Court Justice Janet Protasiewicz, decided to switch course and let Democrats do what they do best: supporting Republicans. State Democrats have, once again, said parties need to come together to fix the problem they caused. “We must see each other not as enemies, but as fellow Americans," Evers said. Changes in the maps have garnered mixed results from Wisconsinites. One local Milwaukee north side resident didn’t notice any changes. One white Madisonian, who identified himself as a liberal, has shown his excitement for the new legislative maps. He’s excited to see property values increase. “I like the maps,” the Madison resident said. “It’s about time they change the lines to stop busing other children to my child’s school.” Democrats, now realizing the mistake, are now sending emails to voters for campaign donations to change maps again. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Attendees gather around the second floor of the Capitol Rotunda to admire the Christmas tree at the 2024 Holiday Tree Lighting Ceremony on December 5, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks Gov. Tony Evers joined Smokey Bear in leading the Annual Tree Lighting Ceremony at the state Capitol. By Maria Knaack December 6, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wreaths and big red bows adorned the room as Wisconsinites and community members of all ages gathered in the Capitol Rotunda Thursday with Gov. Tony Evers for the annual Holiday Tree Lighting Ceremony, which included special guest Smokey Bear. This year’s theme for the green 30-foot balsam fir is “125 years of Wisconsin’s State Parks” to launch a celebration for the anniversary in 2025. The first state park in Wisconsin, Interstate Park, opened in 1900, and Wisconsin now boasts 50 state parks. Kids, students and families sent in homemade ornaments to decorate the tree, sharing what the state parks mean to them. The ornaments featured Wisconsin’s native animals and plants, natural features and favorite outdoor activities such as kayaking and camping. Wisconsin Department of Tourism Secretary Anne Sayers welcomed the audience and spoke along with Robin Schmidt, a Natural Resources Board member who shared a personal anecdote of visiting state parks with family. “Regardless of age, we all benefit from these experiences that will last a lifetime,” Schmidt said. At the ceremony Evers shared his appreciation for state parks. “As governor, I’ve had the privilege of visiting at least a dozen state parks just in the last few years. I think we can all agree we are fortunate to be surrounded by so much natural beauty every day. Wisconsin is a treasure of natural beauty and wonder,” Evers said. After a countdown, Smokey Bear joined a 7th grader, who shared stories of her experience with and love for Wisconsin’s state parks, to push the button and light up the tree’s LED lights. Wauwatosa East Orchestra played festive holiday music for the second year in a row. Rich Burke and the Burke family in Rhinelander donated this year’s tree, making this the second year in a row that the Capitol’s tree came from the Rhinelander area. The tree was selected for its height and natural shape, never having been trimmed, and was cut down in a ceremony last month. This follows a tradition of selecting a tree from Wisconsin landowners, honoring the state’s heritage of forestry. The tree will be displayed in the Capitol Rotunda through the end of the year for the public to see. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations 19 arrested after pro-Palestine protesters interrupt Board of Regents meeting
The front of Paul's Bookstore on December 3, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Students mourn as Paul’s Book Store closes after 70-year run The independent business announced it will close its doors early next year. By Mia Salbego December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Paul’s Book Store, a beloved fixture at 670 State St. known for its vintage charm and atmosphere, announced on Instagram on Nov. 28 that it will close in early 2025 after 70 years in business. The bookstore’s social media page posted a farewell statement on Thanksgiving, not specifying a reason for the closure but extending thanks to employees and customers. “It’s been an adventure and a labor of love,” read the caption. “And now it’s time to say goodbye.” The shop opened in 1954 by founder Paul Askins and was later taken over by his widow Caryl Askins following his passing in 1975, according to Channel3000. Despite her limited experience in the business of books, her stewardship helped establish the store as a cherished spot on State Street. A short distance from campus, the small, independent bookstore held a place in the hearts of many UW-Madison students. “It’s very different from a Barnes & Noble, it’s very mom-and-pop vibes,” said Avery Doemel, a UW-Madison junior. Doemel remembers the first time she noticed the shop, prior to her first semester at UW. “I was walking down State Street, and I noticed a really cute bookstore,” Doemel recalled. “I really liked the music that they played and how they used vinyls. It sets the mood and gives a whole new feel when you go inside.” Sarah Kissel, a UW class of 1994 alum and current attorney at the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, remembers buying books for her English literature classes at Paul’s Book Store during her time as a student. Kissel expressed disappointment but said she understood the business’s decision. “Part of the reason owning a bookstore is such a grind today is the obvious competition with Amazon,” said Kissel. “How do you compete with being able to open the computer that you keep in your pocket and, in under a minute, order something at a lesser price?” As a Madison community member and mother of a current UW student, Kissel hopes that whatever business moves in to fill the spot on State Street maintains the area’s charm. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I hope that whatever it is, it maintains the continuity of weirdness for State Street,” said Kissel, referring to the book store’s eclectic collection of books and other items. “I hope that it’s somebody new’s dream.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo courtesy of Nine Sols via IGDB. ARTS Nine Sols: A sun-kissed descent into cyberpunk cat chaos Developed and published by Red Candle Games, Nine Sols is a masterpiece in both metroidvania design and Chinese mythological integration. By Arin Chandra October 17, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In a world full of metroidvanias — action games with non-linear progression — and platformer games struggling to compete with the likes of Hollow Knight and Dead Cells, Red Candle Games created a home run of a game that successfully integrates difficult gameplay with a phenomenal narrative and an art style based in Daoist mythology. Released on May 29, 2024, Nine Sols certainly competes with the all-time greats of the genre and is one of the best games to come out this year. A Daoist dystopia Looking from the outside in, Nine Sols is a story about the Solarians, a race of cat-like creatures, and their fall from grace. Protagonist Yi is betrayed by his mentor in a near-death encounter but survived thanks to the Primordial Roots, the Solarians’ main energy source. After living with the captured humans (hilariously called “Apemen”) on the New Kunlun colony ship, Yi finally gets the opportunity to return to the ship prior and exact his revenge on the Nine Sols, the tyrannical leaders who are responsible for betraying him. In contrast with the game’s futuristic elements and its ruthlessly brilliant artistic decisions, such as complex cargo belts and high-end research labs that only anthropomorphic cats can make, it shows the player that the Solarians were once pushing all sorts of boundaries in science and technology while also maintaining their roots. The futuristic setting isn’t the only thing going for Nine Sols, as it also features a robust backdrop shrouded in Daoist concepts. Many characters in the game bear striking resemblances to mythological Chinese figures. One of the most important ones is Shuanshuan, a human who is an indirect reference to the Yellow Emperor — a mythological ruler who allegedly shaped the key precepts of Daoism — including the quest for long life and a harmonious society. The evolving relationship between Yi and Shuanshuan shows how time can allow friendships to prosper. Given the game’s Daoist influence, their relationship can also be interpreted as a divine blessing to the Yellow Emperor from a “higher being” in the Solarian Yi. Another example of Daoism’s influence in Nine Sols is Yi himself. Meant to represent the mythological archer Hou Yi, he uses a bow and a sword throughout the game. However, his story differs from that of Hou Yi based on the player’s choices. Yi either succumbs to his goal of revenge or creates a new one of saving the imprisoned humans, either deviating from or adhering to Hou Yi’s fate. But both stories both share the concept of “shooting down” the Nine Sols, or the Nine Suns, and leaving one of them to guide the common people. The story is a wondrous blend of future and fiction that never fails to surprise. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Cat souls” A game with an amazing story can still have bad gameplay to even it out to mediocrity. Luckily, Nine Sols doesn’t suffer from this problem. Yi starts off with some basic equipment — he can jump, dash and slash just like any other platformer character. But the real game changer in Nine Sols is the ability to deflect incoming attacks. All of this builds up Chi, which Yi can consume to hit an enemy with exploding talisman attacks for more damage. A combination of all of these basic elements already makes for an exceptionally nuanced gameplay experience. The best part about these abilities is that they are given to Yi when he needs them the most, allowing for many encounters to be the most challenging when you first see them. All of these mechanics are matched with well-designed enemies. Even the regular enemies the player encounters right at the beginning of the game can prove to be a big annoyance near the end. The boss battles serve as a worthy challenge for applying the skills the player has acquired throughout Yi’s journey. They start off decently enough but ramp up in quality quickly. The final boss is the ultimate test and feels like a flawless culmination of both skills and endurance, marking itself as one of the best in the entire genre. Combining intensity, power and culture, the soundtrack and audio design contribute to an addicting gameplay experience and further help to immerse the player in the world at hand. Nine Sols is an undeniably difficult game. Every death or setback is a learning opportunity. This is why many consider it a “Sekiro-like,” because of the uphill battle every encounter represents for the player. The most rewarding way to experience Nine Sols is to never give up. Pushing through the end of this experience has taught me a great deal about the potential of the metroidvania and platformer genres, and the best ones are always the ones that allow the players to keep pushing forward. Final thoughts Nine Sols weaves cyberpunk and mythological Chinese elements to create a unique world with many cultural aspects for players to discover, especially those tied to Daoist imagery and thematics. Its characters highlight a story of universal compassion and an allusion to the rise of mythological rulers in Eastern history with an art style to boot. And all of this is corroborated by a near-flawless gameplay system that encourages creativity and perseverance. Nine Sols is definitely one of the best metroidvanias ever made, and it is perhaps a true contender for Game of the Year. Overall Rating: 10/10 - Masterpiece Length: 12-24 hours Nine Sols is out now on Steam and all major consoles. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Drake White-Bergey | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Eastern European students willing to give Trump a shot on ending Russo-Ukraine war Eastern European University of Wisconsin-Madison students are open to President-elect Trump’s promises to end Russia’s war in Ukraine. By Peter Fishman December 5, 2024 | 3:00am CST Many Eastern European University of Wisconsin-Madison students who went to the polls for the 2024 election paid close attention to the candidates' foreign policy stances on Russia’s war in Ukraine and came away with a favorite. “Overall, I was more receptive of Trump’s stance [because] I feel that Ukraine, even with arms support, doesn’t have the military capacity to take back more land and risks losing more [in a prolonged war],” said Mikhail, a UW-Madison sophomore originally from Austin, adding this view informed his vote. Mikhail isn’t alone in his reasoning. While some Eastern European UW-Madison students expressed skepticism of Trump’s unpredictability, many students told the Cardinal they were willing to give Trump a chance to bring a quick end to Russia’s war in Ukraine. Trump's pledge to end war attracts student support Since Feb. 24, 2022, when Russian President Vladimir Putin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the war has become a flashpoint in American politics. The incumbent Biden administration has been a staunch defender of Ukraine, spending $106 billion in direct military aid which has helped the beleaguered country reclaim more than half of the territory Russia had taken since 2022. In contrast, Trump has refused to say whether he wants Ukraine to win the war but has said he would end the war during his first day in office. UW-Madison sophomore Georgii Sukhotin, originally from the suburbs of Moscow, didn’t vote in the 2024 election but said he appreciated Trump’s “initiative” in brokering a swift end to the war. “He showed real interest in ending this war and this is what’s most important for me,” Sukhotin said, adding he doubted Ukraine could currently defeat Russia. “I don’t want more deaths, more fighting.” Other students said Trump’s approach to diplomacy appealed to them. UW-Madison junior Yaroslav Polyakov, a Muscovite Jew, said Biden’s aid to Ukraine has been insufficient and “minimal” in bringing an end to the war, while Trump would take decisive action. “He’s not afraid to sit at the same table with dictators like Putin and Kim Jong-Un,” Polyakov said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Trump’s ‘unpredictability’ sparks concern While students said they were open to Trump taking action to end the war, some expressed concern over how Trump would accomplish that. Mikhail said his mom, a Russian-speaking Ukrainian from Kharkiv, disliked Trump’s “unpredictability” and potential he would “discard” Ukraine. A Russian UW-Madison freshman, who requested to remain anonymous, echoed these concerns adding her belief that Trump would force an unequal deal on Ukraine. “Trump will probably push Ukraine to give up the four occupied provinces to Russia in exchange for peace,” she said. However, she said Trump would be a stronger negotiator than Biden. Despite Trump’s pledges to cut aid to Ukraine, Polyakov voiced his belief that the Trump administration wouldn’t cease support. “It’s obvious Trump will continue to support Ukraine in some form even if he claimed he’d stop sending weapons and money,” said Polyakov. Why they voted for Trump For some Eastern Europeans, the Democratic Party’s perceived promotion of “big government” values and support for social movements seemed foreign. UW-Madison junior Andrei Vardanyan, from Armenia, voiced his belief that most Eastern European immigrants voted for Trump due to his outlook on the LGBTQ community. “For those with post-Soviet outlooks, LGBT diversity is alien to them,” Vardanyan said. “Trump’s rhetoric that there are only two genders was more appealing to them, in my opinion.” “While many Democrats are for societal progress by backing movements like BLM, Trans Lives Matter, and so on, many older post-Soviet people don’t understand these movements since promotions of such social issues didn’t exist back in the USSR,” said Mikhail. “As a result, they think Republicans are less radical or more moderate than Democrats.” Regarding pro-Russian or pro-Ukrainian sympathies, Vardanyan also drew comparisons between Eastern European youth in the U.S. and in Armenia. Support for Ukraine is a “generational” issue, Vardanyan said. “The parents are more conservative and pro-Russian while the kids are largely liberal, sometimes even radically liberal, and more pro-western.” Students see a murky future regardless of who’s in office While desires to end the war were clear among all the students the Cardinal interviewed, no one is certain what the results of these peace talks would be and how it would shape the region for years to come. A likely subject held over peace talks would be the status of the five provinces of Crimea, Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhia and Kherson, all occupied by Russian forces. Last year, Ukrainian president Volodymor Zelenskyy said Ukraine had no plans to stop fighting until all of Ukraine’s territories were recaptured. Vardanyan believes peace with Russia would only be temporary before a new war with imperialist aims would erupt. “If Russia wins the war and integrates parts of Ukraine into its territory, it won’t stop. Belarus will be next to fall, then Georgia, then Armenia, and likely the Central Asian countries too.” Sukhotin is among the 650,000 emigres who left Russia in the wake of the mobilization order. Prior to moving to the U.S., he lived in Portugal, a popular destination for Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian expats. He longs for the war to end so that he might return home and be reunited with his family. “I hope everything will return to a state of normalcy at some point.” Sukhotin said. Polyakov expressed a similar sentiment. “I hope this horrible war ends soon,” Polyakov said. “I miss my family, and with the ongoing war, I don’t have a chance to see them.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS As cities and schools turn to referendums to fill budget gaps, officials debate their effectiveness With several referendums on the Nov. 5 ballot, local leaders have mixed feelings about their effectiveness. By Vanessa Gavilan October 25, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Dane County has six referendums appearing on the Nov. 5 ballot, and voters must make the decision that is meant to give them a voice in funding and approving local policy. Of these six referendums, four ask voters to approve property tax increases in Madison, Monona, Fitchburg and the village of McFarland beyond what is otherwise allowed under the state’s levy limit. The other two would provide funding to the Madison Metropolitan School District (MMSD) for facility upgrades and staff wages. Madison depends heavily on property taxes to fund city operations — drawing over 70% of its annual revenue from the property tax levy — but state law caps the amount each municipality can increase taxes at around 2%. The additional 5% of property tax raises to cover city operations would need to come from a referendum in order to bypass the current limit.. FairVote, a nationwide nonpartisan organization focused on voting reforms, told The Daily Cardinal referendums like the ones proposed in Madison and other municipalities are very important to local communities. “[Referendums] empower voters, who can directly adopt reforms that improve their government and their lives,” said Deb Otis, the director of research and policy at FairVote. “When a dysfunctional government has stood in the way of policy desired by the majority of voters, ballot measures gave that majority a voice.” District 17 Ald. Sabrina Madison echoed Otis’s statement and said in a blog post “supporting the referendum is an investment in the future of our district.” But other voters believe referendums are an imperfect last resort to meet community needs, and though officials look to alleviate immediate budget gaps, the rising costs of services means municipalities and school districts may need to put referendums on the ballot again in the future. Insufficient shared revenue leaves referendums as ‘only vehicles’ to fund programs Whitman Bottari, communications director for the University of Wisconsin-Madison College Democrats, told the Cardinal local referendums “are the only vehicles we have at this point to fund vital programs.” Bottari cited the state’s Shared Revenue Program, now called the County and Municipal Aid Program, as one of the devices that caused Dane County to need a referendum to raise additional funds. The program distributes a portion of the state’s revenue to local governments using a loose formula that provides each county a valuation based on aidable revenue and per capita balances. The amount of shared revenue distributed to local governments steadily decreased from 2004 until the state boosted funding last year, and Madison has consistently received less per capita than the rest of the state. The state’s second-largest city collects just $29 per person in shared revenues compared to the statewide average of $195, according to a 2024 report from the Wisconsin Policy Forum, a nonpartisan policy research organization. District 10 Ald. Yannette Figueroa Cole said in a blog post a property tax referendum “would not be necessary if Madison simply received the average rate of shared revenue.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Figueroa Cole added Madison’s referendum to raise property taxes would not need to be imposed on voters if the city could raise taxes elsewhere. The city is not authorized to raise a local sales tax. MMSD blames state shortcomings These structural issues extend to the MMSD referendums. Edell Fiedel, senior director of communications for MMSD, told the Cardinal revenue gaps only occur because state legislation does not adequately support the district. Fiedel said MMSD has a revenue gap of $30.2 million for 2023-2025 due to the fact that “support from the state — which is holding billions of taxpayer dollars in reserve — did not keep pace with inflation.” These problems of support extend beyond the city of Madison. More than 120 Wisconsin school districts have placed referendums on the Nov. 5 ballot to receive help with operating expenses and facilities improvements, according to Fiedel. The Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) federal fund, which provided funds to school districts across the nation during the pandemic, expired last month, putting more financial pressure on districts. While lawmakers have added almost $1 billion in funding for education to the state budget, districts still fall short of the adequate funding, Fiedel said. “If our legislators were more committed to investing in the outcomes of Wisconsin students, districts like ours wouldn't continually need to rely so heavily on taxpayer dollars to operate and modernize,” Fiedel said. Both the city and MMSD said the community could potentially expect further referendums down the line if changes aren’t made to policy. “Without changes to current legislation that translate to increased state-level support for public education, districts across Wisconsin, including ours, will have to continue to rely on taxpayer support to undertake large-scale capital improvement projects and make necessary investments in current and future generations of students,” MMSD said on their website. The Office of the Mayor said in a press release that the current referendum will balance the budget until 2030 but that additional special charges could be implemented starting in 2027 for future budget gaps. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Bailey Krause | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE As UW-Madison students struggle to vote, a campus group is here stepping up By Madison Moris October 24, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Around campus, you may have noticed workers engaging with students and motivating them to vote in the upcoming election. As the upcoming presidential election sits on the horizon, Wisconsin remains a crucial swing state with organizations getting involved to turn out the student vote. One of these organizations is Rise at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. While not officially affiliated with Rise Free Organization, the nonpartisan student group empowers student voices by helping them create a plan to vote and providing the resources needed to register. Hannah Cacciapaglia, a third-year political science and gender and women’s studies major, began working with Rise as a paid organizer in February. One of her goals is to get more people to vote by reducing obstacles with registration. “We try to build excitement around voting and make it feel less like a ‘civic duty’ and more of something you are excited to do, as it will affect your day-to-day campus life after Election Day,” Cacciapaglia told The Daily Cardinal. Cacciapaglia said the organization doesn’t directly register students to vote, but they have other tools to get more students involved in the election process. “Right now we’re focused on collecting pledges to vote from students and community members, but primarily students,” she said. Each team member gets several pledges on any given day depending on the amount of students who engage with them and the location of their set-up, Cacciapaglia said. Team members fan out to busy locations across campus, including Library Mall, East Campus Mall and Gordon Dining and Event Center. A typical day sees them netting around 20 to 25 pledges. As an out-of-state student from New England, Cacciapaglia said she faced barriers to voting in Wisconsin even with her personal interest in social justice and the political process. Rise member AJ Dehnke, a third-year journalism major student, told the Cardinal voter barriers include voter ID laws that make it more difficult for students, particularly out-of-state students, to vote in Wisconsin. Cacciapaglia said it is even more important for an organization like Rise—which emphasizes the student vote in Wisconsin—to make voting information accessible for those who may not necessarily be as interested in politics as her. As part of their campaign, Rise also strives to break-down concerns on where and how to vote. Cacciapaglia hopes hearing this information from another student makes it less intimidating. In fact, Dehnke joined the organization in September after learning about it from Cacciapaglia in order to motivate students to engage with the election. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Especially since early summer, I sensed a lot of apathy around the election, and I wanted to help alleviate that among the student body and get as many people to show up and vote as possible,” Dehnke said. To help these students vote, Rise has created the UW-Madison Voter Guide. The graphic walks people through how to vote in Wisconsin, which can also be found on their Instagram page. In addition to Wisconsin’s status as a key swing state, students’ votes on local issues such as housing and transportation are also important, Dehnke said. Dehnke said this work is impactful as he feels the group is reaching a lot of students. “I’ve done a couple of class talks where I go in front of lecture halls and present information about voting, and there have been a couple people that came up to me afterwards and thanked me for doing this,” he said. As a nonpartisan organization, Rise doesn’t push a particular candidate. He also said through Rise’s research, they have determined if people make a plan to vote, they are three times more likely to actually cast a ballot. “We just want to give people all the information they need in order to make an informed decision that reflects their values,” Dehnke said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Tommo Grass (left) and Memphis Belle Cleveland (right) appearing at the premiere of Martin Scorsese's film "Killers of the Flower Moon" in Sun Prairie, WI. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Indigenous actors in ‘Killers of the Flower Moon’ praise film’s depiction of Osage tragedy Martin Scorsese’s latest film is a devastating snapshot of white American greed and its lasting impact on Native Americans. By Anna Kleiber November 2, 2023 | 4:00am CDT “Killers of the Flower Moon” depicts a haunting narrative known all too well by Indigenous tribes across the country. Based on a 2017 nonfiction book of the same name, Martin Scorcese’s film “Killers of the Flower Moon” unravels a deeply unsettling chapter of American history in painstaking detail, leaving audiences reflecting on the numerous atrocities depicted in the three-and-a-half hour film. The film depicts the dark and complex history of the Osage Nation and the gruesome murders of their people at the hands of white outsiders who sought to gain the Osage’s newfound wealth after the discovery of oil on their reservation. Lily Gladstone (Mollie Kyle) stars alongside Leonardo DiCaprio (Ernest Burkhart) and Robert De Niro (William “King” Hale) to bring this haunting story to life. The film introduces viewers to the Osage Nation through the eyes of an outsider, Ernest Burkhart, who moved in with his uncle William “King” Hale after serving in World War Ⅰ. Ernest’s relationship with Mollie Kyle, an Osage woman whose family owns oil headrights, slowly introduces the audience to the Osage people and their ways of life. Gladstone’s performance dazzled the audience. Her way of speech was careful and deliberate, relying on facial expressions to convey what was left unsaid. Throughout the film, Mollie’s voice-over narration gives the audience real and raw insight into her anguish as, one by one, she loses family members at the hands of greedy and corrupt forces outside of her control. “Evil crowds my heart,” she narrates at one point in the film as she prepares to bury yet another family member. “They say I ought to kill these white men who killed my family.” Mollie’s voice-over narrations tell a story Mollie dares not speak aloud. As the film progresses, Mollie’s narration communicates her fear and anxiety as those around her continue to be murdered in brutal and deeply unsettling ways, taking her sense of safety in her home and community. Ernest’s one instance of voice-over narration in the film stands in stark contrast to Mollie’s. He recites some lines from a book about Osage culture over a montage that depicts him and other white men robbing an Osage couple at gunpoint. “Can you spot the wolves in this picture?” the narration closes out, hinting at what is to come later on in the movie. By the end of the film, the audience feels as though they witnessed Mollie’s melancholy and pain firsthand, almost as if they knew her and her struggles on an intimate level. While the film closes with an aerial shot of the Osage today, dancing in their traditional attire to the beat of a drum, this bright and colorful scene reminds the audience of the strength and resilience of the Osage people and other Indigenous tribes across the country. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Law firm Quarles and Brady sponsored a premiere of the film in Sun Prairie on Oct. 26 to celebrate Wisconsin’s Indigenous tribes. Most of the guests at the screening were of tribal descent, enrolled tribal clientele of the firm and elected tribal leaders. Also in attendance were special guests Memphis Belle Cleveland and Tommo Grass, who acted as extras in the film. Grass said it was important to have Indigenous people “from anywhere and everywhere” in the film. “I think it meant the world to a lot of us,” Grass said. As someone from Oklahoma with family members who are a part of the Osage tribe, Grass said being in the film meant a lot to him because he knew how important it was to tell this story. Grass said there are a lot of people who still share the same last names of some of the victims depicted in the film and many Osage people of his generation knew of people directly impacted by the “real-life horrible things” that happened during the Osage Reign of Terror — which refers to the nearly two-decade-long string of brutal murders depicted in the film. “I think it carried a lot of weight for a lot of us,” Grass said. There was “a heaviness” at times while filming due to many of the background actors having lineage that traced back to Osage family members who witnessed the atrocities depicted in the film firsthand, Cleveland said. “Not only were we over there portraying these people, but we're also almost having to relive what they had to go through as well,” Cleveland said. Cleveland said it meant a lot to be able to tell this story on the big screen alongside big-name actors, people she said were genuine and “respected our Native American values” on and off set. Although there were a lot of hurdles she had to overcome, Cleveland said she was glad she took the jump to be a part of this film. “I knew what this movie was going to mean for Indigenous people,” Cleveland said. “It's not every day that you get a story being told about the atrocities that have happened in many tribes, not just Osage.” Though many of the guests at the screening were from Wisconsin, some traveled quite far to attend. Charmaine McDarment, a general counselor for the Tule River Indian Tribe of California, caught a red-eye flight from California to attend the premiere. McDarment said she was unfamiliar with the Osage tribe and the atrocities they endured before reading the book a year ago. “I mean, every tribe has their stories of what happened to them. It didn't surprise me, but it was so tragic and hard for me to read,” McDarment said. “Killers of the Flower Moon” is eye-opening for people who don’t know a lot about Native American tribes and the hardships they have faced throughout American history, McDarment added. “It's hard to find Native American historical stories if you're not informed because they are not common knowledge,” McDarment said. “The film makes you think about what [Native Americans] have been through and what we had to do to survive.” “Killers of the Flower Moon” was released in theaters on Oct. 20 and is also available to stream on Apple TV. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of Pinchofhealth/Flickr SCIENCE UW-Madison genetic scientists sound alarm on AI overreliance, say there are persistent flaws in data Researchers in the Genetics-Biotechnology Center at UW-Madison published a study in September, raising concerns over issues found in AI-assisted genome-wide association studies and offer new statistical methods for improvement. By Marco Lama November 21, 2024 | 3:00am CST Researchers in the Genetics-Biotechnology Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, led by associate professor Qiongshi Lu, published a study Sept. 30 in Nature Genetics raising concerns over persistent problems found in artificial intelligence-assisted genome-wide association studies. Broadly, genome-wide association studies search for links between genetic variation and health traits. This process requires large amounts of genetic and health related data, which come from “biobanks” that collect and store biological data. Based on links found in these datasets, scientists can predict future health risks for people with certain genetic traits. But attempting to predict certain health risks is challenging. “Some outcomes are very easy to measure. If you want to study the genetics of height, it’s easy to measure everyone’s height and DNA and just link them to identify associations. But if you want to study, say, Alzheimer’s, it gets tricky,” Lu said. Collecting and studying the traits of diseases like Alzheimer’s in large numbers is difficult because there isn’t enough prevalence in the datasets. This is mostly because collecting this type of data is extremely resource intensive. Without enough data, researchers don’t have the statistical power to make health-risk predictions. As a result, it has become popular in recent years to leverage AI tools, which can infer unknown traits based on proxy data. This allows scientists to work around the challenge of missing data by assigning traits to individuals in whom that trait has not been actually observed. But Lu said the inferences don’t account for their own uncertainty. Jiacheng Miao, a Ph.D. student in the Biomedical Data Science Program at UW-Madison and co-author of the study published in Nature Genetics, told The Daily Cardinal many scientists “are pretending that outcomes produced by AI are the gold standard, but we show that this is actually a pretty bad idea.” “For example, we have hospital-recorded diabetes statuses of individuals. So we created an AI predicted diabetes status to compare the results, and we found that they differ a lot,” he said. Further comparisons revealed persistent flaws in traits produced by AI. In response to these findings, Lu’s team developed a new statistical framework to improve the quality of AI inferences. While the results have been well-received within the field of genome research, they have not yet been widely implemented since Lu and his colleagues are some of the first to advance this discussion in genome-wide association studies, Lu said. Impacts The results of genome research are often used in developing therapeutic drugs. However, it’s possible that without the right statistical frameworks in place, these drugs will be developed based on contaminated data. While drugs built on false data would likely not make it past testing stages, Lu said developing those ineffective treatments “is a huge waste of resources.” “You could spend 10 years focusing on a therapeutic intervention strategy just to realize it’s false,” Lu said. “We need frontier methodology to guard people against spurious findings, so that we can really efficiently advance the field of medical sciences.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marco LamaMarco is a features writer for The Daily Cardinal. He is an English and History major and has experience covering local businesses. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Wisconsin 'Forward' Statue stands in front of the entrance to the Wisconsin State Capitol. Photo by Drake White-Bergey | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Republican lawmakers to reintroduce bill banning gender-affirming care for minors Wisconsin Republican lawmakers are prepared to reintroduce bills banning gender-affirming care after the U.S. Supreme Court signaled they may uphold a Tennessee anti-trans law. By Anna Kleiber December 5, 2024 | 12:06pm CST Republican lawmakers plan to reintroduce legislation banning gender-affirming care for minors after the U.S Supreme Court signaled the issue should be left to the states to decide. The Supreme Court’s conservative majority hinted Wednesday they may uphold a Tennessee law that prohibits gender-affirming care for minors. Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Brett Kavanaugh suggested the issue should be debated in state legislatures, not the courts. Following the hearing, Rep. Scott Allen, R-Waukesha, told CBS58 he plans to reintroduce his bill that would reduce access to gender transition services including sterilization surgeries, mastectomies, puberty blockers and hormones for minors. Rep. Barbara Dittrich, R-Oconomowoc, defended the bill, adding that she plans to reintroduce her bill to ban transgender youth from playing on women and girls’ sports teams this coming legislative session, according to CBS58. "It's such a permanent decision to make," Dittrich told CBS58. "There are many things we don't allow minors to do that are really serious and I think this is one of them. It's concerning." Previously, Allen, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, and Sen. Duey Stroebel, R-Cedarburg, proposed the same bill in October 2023 titled the “Help Not Harm Act.” In July 2022, Republicans introduced another similar bill that did not reach a public hearing or vote. A total of 14 anti-LGBTQ+ bills were introduced during the 2024 legislative session, all of which failed to pass the Legislature or were vetoed by Gov. Tony Evers. Evers has promised to veto legislation targeting transgender Wisconsinites. This is a developing story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Lauren Aguila | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison Starbucks workers strike in nationwide protest for better pay, working conditions Employees at the Starbucks located on Capitol Square say the company has refused to negotiate with the union. By Francesca Pica March 22, 2023 | 5:00pm CDT Employees of the Starbucks located on Capitol Square went on strike Wednesday as part of a nationwide protest to push for better pay and working conditions. Workers picketed outside the Starbucks on 1 East Main St. after they claimed representatives from the company refused to negotiate with employees for better compensation. Lee Marfyak, a shift supervisor of five years, told The Daily Cardinal workers’ demand jobs that afford them a level of stability and the ability to support themselves without needing additional sources of income. “We want a good workplace. We don’t want to tear down Starbucks. We don’t want to drive them out of business,” Marfyak said. “We just want to be able to make enough to make our ends meet and have a decent work life where we’re not stressed and doing six jobs at once.” The company punished Starbucks locations that chose to unionize, such as the Capitol Square location, according to Marfyak. For example, Starbucks implemented credit card tipping only at non-unionized locations, leaving unionized employees without an additional source of income. Marfyak said credit card tipping would provide a much-needed boost in pay for employees without harming Starbucks’ profits. “It would cost Starbucks no money,” Marfyak said. “It’s literally just a software update they could roll out, and it would increase our wages by like 10 to 15%. It would be substantial, especially when we’re all barely or not making a living wage and can’t really survive.” According to a survey from Pew Research Center, 41% of Americans don’t pay any of their typical weekly expenses with cash. Only 14% use cash for all or most of their expenses. Another employee, James, who asked to remain anonymous, said wages are not sufficient for employees to have financial security. “My pay pretty much covers rent and food, and maybe I can buy new pants or something like that,” James said. “If anything major happens [like] an emergency, that’s always scary.” Senua O’Connor, a barista at the Capitol Square location, said Starbucks has also implemented new services such as DoorDash delivery without scheduling additional staff, leaving employees feeling overwhelmed with the added responsibilities. “I think the understaffing is getting to be really tangible,” O’Connor said. “Pretty consistently, we’re noticing those days where we’re just understaffed, and Starbucks is just flooding us.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Along with low labor hours, people lose hours they expect to work per week,” said Joanna Weir, a part-time Starbuck employee. “Often stores don’t have the coverage they need because of labor hours set by corporate, who don’t have the insight on what coverage a store needs.” Employees have attempted to negotiate with Starbucks for raises and improved working conditions, according to Marfyak, but the company has refused to listen to their demands. “So far, we’ve had one negotiation session a few months ago, where they walked out of the room after probably less than 10 minutes,” Marfyak said. The strike at the Madison Starbucks coincided with protests from workers in more than 100 locations across the country, including Starbucks locations in Minnesota, Colorado and New Jersey, in what organizers called a “National Day of Action.” Workers and labor advocates criticized Starbucks for allegedly undermining unions throughout the country, including firing workers for union activity. The Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, headed by chairman Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT), called former interim CEO Howard Shultz to testify before the committee on March 29 about the company’s labor practices. Weir said the Senate testimony could serve as an opportunity to hold Starbucks accountable for its treatment of workers. “Union busting tactics take a lot away from employees,” Weir said. “With the Democrats’ support for unions we’re hoping to see laws pass that make unionizing easier. I’m hoping Bernie [Sanders] and the committee see the evidence.” Schultz stepped down as interim CEO of the company Monday, days before he was scheduled to testify. James said good working conditions are a prerequisite for Starbucks to maintain successful locations. “If they want good employees that are always going to do a good job and provide great customer service, they should make it a type of job that is sustainable,” James said. Ultimately, O’Connor said the workers are fighting for the ability to make a stable, livable wage. “The thing that we want in the end is just to be able to work here and have it be a job that you could potentially stay at for your whole life,” O’Connor said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Francesca PicaFrancesca Pica is the editor-in-chief for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the city news editor. She has covered multiple municipal elections, state politics and is a leading reporter on Madison labor issues. She served as an intern for The Capital Times, currently serves as a WisPolitics intern and will also intern with the Wisconsin State Journal this summer. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of Beautifulcataya via Flickr STATE NEWS State superintendent calls on Legislature to increase funding for public schools Wisconsin State Superintendent Jill Underly proposed a $4 billion budget increase in state funding to address gaps in K-12 public education. By Maggie Spinney November 15, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wisconsin State Superintendent Jill Underly proposed a $4 billion increase in state funding for her 2025-27 public education budget Monday to address the financial constraints Wisconsin public schools are currently facing. Underly’s proposal targets special education reimbursements, nutrition, mental health resources and teacher retention. Gov. Tony Evers announced a $4.5 billion state surplus in October following the end of Wisconsin’s fiscal year. Evers said the surplus will guide the next two-year state budget, addressing “needs that have been long neglected.” Underly’s call to lawmakers to increase state funding of public education comes at a time when many public schools frequently rely on local referendums to aid in operations and improvements. “Too many of our school districts across the state are forced to go to referendum just to keep the lights on and our teachers in the classroom,” Underly said in a statement Monday. “Our Legislature has woefully underfunded public education to the detriment of our kids and communities.” The new spending would increase the special education imbursement rate from 31.5% to 90%, adding up to $2 billion in the biennium. “These are mandated services and schools need the help,” Underly said. “Our proposal puts us on a path to achieve that goal in the coming years.” Additionally, Underly’s proposal includes a per student increase to revenue limits to $425 in the first year and $437 in the second year, totaling $1 billion over the biennium to provide sustainable funding for Wisconsin public schools. Property tax increases would be limited to an average of 1.5% over the biennium. The proposal includes a $212 increase for aid funding, $20 million to reduce chronic absenteeism and $10 million to reimburse local education agencies for uncovered special education expenses. Rep. Francesca Hong, D-Madison, said in a statement Monday that Underly’s proposal will create sustainable funding for Wisconsin public schools and relieve the financial constraints many school districts, educators and students are facing due to the Legislature’s “austerity.” “The Wisconsin Legislature has the resources our kids need, yet time and time again, legislative Republicans choose to ignore the widening funding gaps that disadvantage our children,” Hong said. “It’s imperative that we move beyond empty promises and take action.” Republican majorities in both the state Assembly and Senate diminished following the Nov. 5 election. This will be the first legislative term under new district maps signed by Evers earlier this year. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email During a news conference following his reelection as Assembly speaker on Tuesday, Rep. Robin Vos, R-Rochester, said the Assembly is “not in a rush” to spend the state’s surplus. Instead, Vos said Republicans will focus on fighting inflation and “putting the money [Wisconsinites] overpaid back in their wallets.” In the past, Republicans have rejected increased state funding for Wisconsin public schools. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Madison is Kaur’s second stop out of 12 on her American Tour. Photo by Photo courtesy of Wikimedia. | and Joe Carlson The Daily Cardinal ARTS Rupi Kaur to bring internationally acclaimed poetry to Madison By Allison Garfield September 28, 2018 | 11:13pm CDT Rupi Kaur, renowned poet and author of “Milk and honey” and “The Sun and Her Flowers,” will stop in Madison tomorrow for her American tour. Kaur is an Indian-born Canadian poet and #1 New York Times bestselling author and illustrator of two collections of poetry. She started drawing at the young age of five, according to her books. Her mother handed her a paintbrush and said — draw your heart out. After completing her degree in rhetoric studies, Kaur published her first collection of poems “Milk and honey” in 2014. The internationally acclaimed collection sold over a million copies and was featured on the New York Times bestsellers list every week for over a year. It has since been translated into over thirty languages. “The Sun and Her Flowers,” her long-awaited second collection, was published in 2017. This collection continued the poet’s exploration of a variety of themes ranging from love, loss, trauma, healing and femininity. Madison is Kaur’s second stop out of 12 on her American Tour. She will be performing as a part of the Wisconsin Union’s season in Shannon Hall at 7:30 pm. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Photo courtesy of Perennial Order via IGDB. ARTS Perennial Order is what you see when you stop and smell the flowers A challenging boss rush meets a strikingly grotesque presentation in Gardenfiend Games’ debut title. By Arin Chandra November 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Perennial Order is Gardenfiend Games’ first venture into game development, mixing a uniquely haunting visual and audio combo with ingenious gameplay decisions to form a marvelous world of plants, beasts and monsters to conquer. Released on Sept. 6 and published by SOEDESCO, Perennial Order creates a challenging experience that takes full advantage of its flawless presentation to envelop the player in the wonders (and horrors) of nature. Natural beauty The game opens with the resurrection of the player character, known only as the Perennial Knight. Immediately, they are tasked with wandering through a bleak and decaying forest, slaying a formidable tree-like creature at the end. This eventful opening segment foreshadows the game’s strongest aspects: its presentation and world building. Throughout the journey, the mood always remains consistently bleak, only matched by the sparse tones of hopefulness in the game’s hub areas, which are populated by non-player characters that both give insight to the state of the world as well as help the knight out with upgrades. The arboreal-infused art style is what makes the presentation top notch. Areas are uniquely characterized through hand-drawn environments and NPCs, ultimately making every place the knight visits a distinct treat for the eyes. From lush jungles filled with life to the foreboding enigma of the abyss, Gardenfiend Games has created a world whose areas feel like walking into paintings. Its art style also contributes to the suspense and horror elements of the experience, especially to the designs of the NPCs and bosses. Everything the player sees in the game is marked with a sense of dread to contribute to the ominous atmosphere, as well as a sense of wonder for the world that came before the events of the game. The art style is not the only star of the show. The original soundtrack captures the desperation behind each hostile encounter as well as the slight flickers of hope that linger in the game’s plant-diseased world. Complementing the foreboding mood Perennial Order maintains, it evokes strong emotions with every new track. A solid narrative helps to give purpose to the masterful presentation of the game. Every boss has some type of story behind them which the knight can discover as they explore and overcome their respective areas. While some explanation for the state of the world is certainly given, there could have been more in terms of what happens to the knight directly to give more weight to the player’s actions and create a more satisfying ending. Aside from the slight misstep in the story, Perennial Order proves to be an exceptionally well-presented experience that keeps the player in a sense of shock throughout its events thanks to its amazing artistic decisions. Thorns in sides Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If Perennial Order is like a painting, then its gameplay is a challenging mix of creating an effective playstyle with the tools at hand and avoiding as many mistakes as possible. It takes only one hit for the knight to fall. However, the game gives them the tools they need to succeed. These include powerful basic charged attacks and holding Wisps, which allows them to either dash to safety or perform various special attacks called Instincts. This allows for the knight to choose between non-stop aggression and precise critical hits. Speaking of precision, Perennial Order demands it from the player at all costs. Each dash is marked with the risk of not being offensive enough to shorten the lengthy boss encounters, and every use of Instincts can prove a fatal error that costs the player time. The delicate balancing act of offense and defense with the limiting Wisp system contributes to the tension and strategy involved with the combat. The game’s difficulty is further pushed forward by the boss battles, which are the main attractions of its combat system. They are incredibly designed within the bounds of the art style and a worthy challenge of the knight’s skills and Instinct combinations. Most importantly, they are fun encounters that encourage various different strategies and setups to overcome. Even though one strategy can work for every boss, there are still many tactics to try out. There is even a boss rush mode that allows players to refight them as many times as they please, encouraging them to push their limits and master every aspect of the combat system. All of this results in a tightly implemented combat system that is pushed to its absolute limit with difficult, creative and fun encounters that encourage players to learn and adapt. Final thoughts Perennial Order proves to be a good omen for Gardenfiend Games and their future in the industry, successfully combining a solid game direction with incredible audio and visual components. The art style is an enthralling take on nature’s unbridled wrath and shows what the developers are capable of. They also manage to make the boss rush aspect an amazing experience, with each fight being a significant development in the player’s story. Even though its narrative leaves something to be desired, Perennial Order is certainly a game worth picking out for the bouquet. Overall rating: 9/10 - Amazing Length: 8-10 hours Perennial Order is out now on Steam, PS5 and XBox Series X. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Cage The Elephant performs at Bonnaroo in 2017. Photo courtesy of Thornton Drury/Wikimedia Commons ARTS Breaking down the bold vibes of Cage the Elephant’s ‘Neon Pill’ Cage the Elephant’s newest album is another solid release from the band after a five-year hiatus. By Arin Chandra November 26, 2024 | 2:00am CST The American rock band Cage the Elephant has garnered well-deserved praise for breathing new life into the music genre, and this remains true after the release of their 6th album “Neon Pill.” After the release of “Social Cues” in 2019, the band went silent as lead singer Matt Schulz found himself in an internal battle with psychosis and getting arrested for bringing loaded firearms to a hotel. Their latest album is an eclectic mix of melancholia, hope and raw emotional confessions. Each track offers a glimpse into the band’s struggles and triumphs, with Schulz recounting his vulnerabilities, anchoring the album’s narrative. Although it isn’t as catchy or consistent as the band’s previous work, Neon Pill stands as a solid entry in their discography. Opening the album, “HiFi (True Light)” sets a melancholic tone while introducing listeners to the band’s evolving sound. Its steady rhythm and subtle introspection paves the way for the emotional depth that follows. An energetic anthem, "Rainbow" offers an uplifting contrast to the darker moments of the album. Its hopeful lyrics remind listeners of the light that can pierce through life’s shadows, making it one of the album’s standout tracks. It also formally introduces Schulz’s struggles with trying to find happiness within his battle with mental health, again contributing to a bittersweet mood throughout the song. The title track “Neon Pill” is a deeply personal exploration of Schulz’s struggles, including his highly publicized arrest. With high-energy beats and poignant lyrics, it tackles themes of addiction and resilience, delivering a strong message of overcoming adversity and self-complicity. The track serves as a gateway between the introductory melancholic mood of the first part of the album and the more emotionally riveting moments of the second part. “Out Loud,” perhaps the most emotionally raw track, feels like a personal confession from Schulz with lyrics that do not necessarily feel songlike. Slower and more intimate, it explores themes of regret and redemption, standing out as the album’s most moving moment. An addictive earworm, "Good Time" is the album’s most infectious track. Its catchy chorus and upbeat instrumentals offer a welcome reprieve from the heavier themes, representing Schulz’s fleeting moments of happiness. It also captures a bit of the nostalgia behind the heavy instrumentals featured in previous albums, whereas “Neon Pill” prefers to be more intimate with its lyrics. “Silent Picture” blends uplifting instrumentals with lyrics that touch on the pain of being unseen in moments of suffering, described as suffocation. The track also represents the loss of friends and growing out of touch with loved ones due to self-negligence. Its optimistic instrumental and cohesive sound make it a memorable addition to the album. Closing the album, "Over Your Shoulder" offers a moving instrumental backdrop to Schulz’s reflective lyrics. With heavy guitar chords and bass drums, it feels formulaic yet fitting, tying together the themes of loss and acceptance. It also serves as a nostalgic window to the band’s early days of producing music with simple instrumentals but convincing lyrics, giving listeners old and new something to appreciate as the album ends. Generally, “Neon Pill” features symbolic songs that capture Schulz’s struggles with acceptance, addiction and being caged in more ways than one. “Shy Eyes,” “Float Into The Sky” and “Metaverse” all serve to emphasize the bittersweet nature of reality and the ever-growing need for escapism, accompanied by exceptional instrumental and vocal performances. Still, it still suffers from a few albums that are below the band’s average. “Ball and Chain” has weaker messaging because of its focus on its incorporation of an improvised and reckless instrumental. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Same” features a much more repetitive strain that succeeds more in messaging but less so in the compositional department. While these tracks are not bad by any means, they happen to fall short of the highs of the album and of the band as a whole. Overall, “Neon Pill” is a cohesive and deeply personal project, with each track contributing to the emotional mosaic of Cage the Elephant’s journey. It’s a testament to the band’s ability to evolve while staying true to their raw, emotive roots. Although it is not as strong as the band’s other albums in terms of instrumental power and catchiness, the themes of self-struggle and acceptance ring true in their latest work. It marks another addition to their impressive and unique discography and is a solid return to form after a five-year hiatus. Rating: 7/10 - Good Best songs: “Good Time,” “Neon Pill,” “Rainbow,” “Out Loud,” “Silent Picture” Weakest song: “Ball and Chain” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of the International Crane Foundation SCIENCE Ride in style with new ‘Cranes of Wisconsin’ license plate Last month, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation released a new “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate, with purchases directly supporting the International Crane Foundation’s work in the state. By Kayla Northway November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wisconsinites can now purchase the new “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate featuring two species of cranes native to North America and Wisconsin: the sandhill crane and the endangered whooping crane. Wisconsin artist Jay Jocham designed the plate, and strives to raise awareness for endangered wildlife and habitats through his art. For over 37 years, he has created art that has helped conservation groups fund programs to protect wildlife. Jocham has done work for the International Crane Foundation previously, including a series of six murals totaling over 1,100 feet in 2020, which are displayed at the International Crane Foundation’s headquarters. Sandhill cranes and whooping cranes are two crane species found in Wisconsin and throughout North America. It’s estimated that there are at least 40,000 sandhill cranes in Wisconsin and their population is steadily increasing. Historically, whooping cranes were hunted for hat-making, trophy hunting, museum collections, sustenance and recreation. In the early 1900s, settlers also overtook the crane’s wetland breeding grounds and native prairies for farming, leaving whooping cranes on the brink of extinction with only 21 individuals left in the wild. Fortunately, that number has since grown to approximately 836 whooping cranes alive today. Whooping cranes are still endangered, but their rise in numbers is largely due to the International Crane Foundation’s conservation efforts to reintroduce an experimental flock of whooping cranes to Wisconsin’s wetlands starting in 2001. Known as the Eastern Migratory Population, this population hosts nearly 80 whooping cranes to date. For each ‘Cranes of Wisconsin’ license plate purchased and subsequent annual registration, the International Crane Foundation will receive a $25 tax deductible donation. Funds from the license plate will support two of the foundation’s “key projects” in Wisconsin: the continued efforts to reintroduce the whooping crane and the resolution of crop damage caused by sandhill cranes. “The issue of crop damage by cranes is one of great importance here in Wisconsin,” Dr. Rich Beilfuss, president and CEO of the International Crane Foundation, said in a statement. “Our Wisconsin team is working hard to ensure that farmers get the help they need through in-the-field farmer outreach and policy advocacy. This Cranes of Wisconsin license plate will further that mission.” The International Crane Foundation has a nearly 300-acre headquarters in Baraboo, Wisconsin, as well as offices and staff all around the globe, including China, Uganda, Kenya, Zambia, South Africa and Texas. The Foundation works worldwide to conserve cranes and the ecosystems, watersheds and flyways on which they depend by providing knowledge, leadership and inspiration to engage people in resolving threats to cranes and their diverse landscapes. In Wisconsin, the most commonly reported crop damage by sandhill cranes is feeding on recently planted corn seed. According to Sandhill Crane Ecology & Damage Management, when large flocks of cranes feed on planted fields, the damage they cause to an unprotected crop can be severe enough to force the farmer to replant the entire field. Sandhill cranes are experts at using their long beaks and finding planted agricultural seeds such as corn. They remove individual corn seeds within the first few weeks after planting and continue to feed on the germinating seed until the corn plant reaches four to eight inches in height. The International Crane Foundation has worked in Wisconsin’s agricultural communities for three decades to resolve the issue of crop damage by cranes, and it was especially instrumental in field-testing to prove the effectiveness of Avipel seed treatment, a non-toxic deterrent that prevents cranes from consuming freshly-planted corn seed, the news release said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email To purchase the International Crane Foundation’s “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate and see what vehicles qualify, please visit Wisconsin Department of Transportation’s website. For more information about the International Crane Foundation and how you can help, please visit: https://savingcranes.org/. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
RSV F protein revealing the linkage that is the target for future research. Image was created using cryo-electron tomography. Photo courtesy of Wright Lab/UW-Madison SCIENCE New images of RSV may hold key to unlocking new treatments A research team at the University of Wisconsin-Madison produced high-resolution images of RSV structure, important for RSV treatment options and vaccine development. By Elliott Murray October 31, 2024 | 2:00am CDT A research team at the University of Wisconsin-Madison has taken a major step toward deciphering the complexity of the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) structure. Led by Elizabeth Wright, a professor of biochemistry, this team has released new high-resolution images of the virus that will aid in developing new treatment and vaccine options. Globally, RSV is the cause of nearly 3 million hospitalizations and 160,000 deaths annually, according to the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Due to the intricate structure of the virus, treatment and vaccine options are extremely limited. High-risk children can receive preventative treatment, and two vaccines have been recently approved for older adults, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics and the New England Journal of Medicine. But for most Americans, there remains no efficient way to treat or prevent this virus. The Journal of General Virology describes infectious RSV particles as filamentous and pleomorphic, meaning they possess long, thread-like structures that can be irregular in length and width. The complexity of these virus particles has limited development of preventative and treatment drugs — researchers such as Wright’s team have had difficulty determining drug targets within these highly intricate structures. Identifying these drug targets requires an understanding of what proteins regulate the structure of infectious RSV particles. As described in their recent publication in Nature, Wright’s research team produced high-resolution 3D images of the virus and the proteins that determine its structure. Utilizing a technique called cryo-electron tomography, in which infectious RSV particles are frozen at cryogenic temperatures, they were able to inspect the structure of RSV at certain moments in time. They captured 2D images of the frozen infectious viral particles at particular tilt increments. These images were then combined and averaged to computationally generate a 3D representation of the virus structure. An analysis of this 3D representation revealed that the structure of two proteins — RSV M and RSV F proteins — within RSV are particularly critical to understanding the structure of the virus. “The imaging found that the RSV M protein is regulating the structure of these filamentous particles,” Wright said. “The M protein forms a helical-like lattice, and it is this lattice of the protein coming together that is regulating RSV formation.” These RSV M proteins also correspond to the positioning of another protein: RSV F. This membrane protein aids in the fusion of the viral RSV membrane with the host cell membrane. The imaging of the protein structure revealed that RSV F proteins are arranged in pairs. Each pair is held together by a small “tag” or linkage. Wright said her team now intends to investigate the structure of this link between two RSV F proteins. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “We want to take a high-resolution image of the little link so we can engineer some sort of target to keep RSV F proteins linked,” said Wright. By keeping the linkage intact, she told the Cardinal, the virus will not be as infectious. Along with further investigation of the RSV F protein, Wright’s team intends to study other potential drug targets on the interior of the virus. “Having more high-resolution structure images will give us more pieces of the story,” Wright said. As RSV is also related to several other viruses, including measles, rabies and Ebola, according to the Journal of General Virology, her team hopes that their discoveries regarding the structure of RSV can be applied to the development of treatment and vaccines for related viruses. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
"Never Anyone But You" creates a moving fiction that navigates same-sex love and self-transformation in a time when women’s voices were just starting to be heard. Photo by Image courtesy of Amazon | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Best Entertainment of 2018: Literature By Lauren Souza and Madeline Peterson December 6, 2018 | 3:38pm CST 1. “Never Anyone But You” by Rupert Thomson Based on actual historical characters, “Never Anyone But You” is narrated by Marcel Moore. Published in June 2018, Thomson sets his eye on the biographies of two pioneering female French surrealists to create a moving fiction that navigates same-sex love and self-transformation in a time when women’s voices were just starting to be heard. Set in the early twentieth century in western France, the narrator, born as Suzanne Malherbe, is a shy 17-year-old who changes her name to Marcel in honor of Marcel Schwob — an avant-garde writer — who was a favorite uncle of Moore’s female lover. Moore becomes entranced by the young and troubled Lucie Schwob, who is death-obsessed and poignantly exposed to her own mother’s insanity. Simultaneously, Lucie transforms herself into the androgynous Claude Cahun. Embarking on a surreptitious love affair, they remain undetected because of their relationship as stepsisters. This timely cover was due to the fact Moore’s mother marries Cahun’s recently divorced father. To escape an overly patriarchal society, they move to Paris in order to not be ruled by provincial conventions. Cahun emerges as an artistic pioneer through gender-challenging self-portraits, winning her a spot in the glamorous social circles of André Breton and Salvador Dalí. She tackled the confining gender conventions through her style, shaving off her hair, passing as a young man in public and posing for more flamboyant portraits. Often, her self-portraits featured her looking directly at the viewer, focusing solely on the head and shoulders — eliminating the rest of the body from view. This blurring of gender indicators enables Cahun to undermine the patriarchal gaze and distort the notions of sexuality and gender. Cahun and Moore share the sentiments of the surrealist movement, the rejection of family and religion, having the same “determination to re-enchant a disenchanted world,” yet never officially join the movement. They are able to find brief bliss: “and Eden with two Eves, no Adam.” The novel transitions to tackle the idealism with the Nazi occupation of the Channel Islands. The horrors of slave labor that is utilized to fortify Jersey shock Cahun and Moore into conducting a heroic, albeit naive, propaganda crusade. The aim was to target the hearts and minds of the occupying enemy. They worked to undermine what they staunchly believed to be “a questionable fidelity” to Hitler by the average German soldier. “Never Anyone But You” is a breath of fresh air from the traditional literary canon, a love story that breaks norms and reminds the readers to be true to themselves. -Lauren Souza Amazon/Courtesy 2. “Vox” by Christina Dalcher With the rise of feminist speculative novels, “Vox” by Christina Dalcher is the latest addition to a terrifying dystopia where rights have been stripped away. All women and girls in America are limited to 100 spoken words a day, having been fitted with a metal bracelet that will electrically shock them if exceeded. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Books are locked up, pens and paper are forbidden and any type of gestures are punishable. The shock is relatively mild for first-time infractions yet becomes more intense later on. The women who campaigned against this situation or committed other offenses against these archaic gender-based laws were forced to become slave laborers in sparsely populated states. The rest of women have lost their jobs, leaving Dr. Jean McClellan — the protagonist — a researcher in neurolinguistics stuck at home in the kitchen. Her research led her to almost developing a serum to reverse Wernicke’s aphasia, a trauma-induced condition that causes people to speak only random words in a nonsensical order. Now, Jean is reduced to a stay-at-home wife of four children, who must spend most of her time in complete silence. The situation that Jean faces is awful, and she recognizes her own contribution to this totalitarianism society. She partially blames herself and recalls, “my fault started two decades ago, the first time I didn’t vote … was too busy to go on [a march].” When her best friend Jackie was campaigning on women’s issues, Jean stayed home studying. She has an overall fear for her family, specifically her 6-year-old daughter Sonia, who also wears a counter. She is too young to have fully developed language skills, and with only speaking 100 words a day, she will never do so. At school she is taught to sew, cook and “a bit of addition and subtraction, telling time, making change. Counting of course. They would learn counting first. All the way up to one hundred.” While women are the main victims, “Vox” demonstrates that everyone eventually becomes a secondary victim pushed into cruel circumstances in this totalitarian regime that enforces self-censoring. Jean’s husband is sympathetic to her plight but is unwilling to speak up for fear of losing his job. Without words, everyone is limited. The novel shifts to a thriller style when Jean is sent back to work to finally produce her serum due to the president’s brother developing aphasia, which gives her the reprieve to speak. Will she use this as an advantage to dismantle this new system of power that places women at the bottom? Jean will fight to reclaim the voices for all women. This novel is a strikingly relevant story that will terrify everyone but inspire to fight for one’s rights. -Lauren Souza Amazon/Courtesy 3. “Feel Free” by Zadie Smith “Feel Free” is a collection of essays by British writer Zadie Smith. Smith’s debut novel, “White Teeth,” was an international success, launching her to literary fame at the age of 25. In addition to publishing a number of novels and short stories, Smith has also written nonfiction essays, many of which are featured in “Feel Free.” For fans of Smith’s characteristic wit and insight, her newest publication will be anything but a disappointment. As the title suggests, the essays cover a wide range of topics all unified by a singular theme: freedom and its pursuit. Smith offers her thoughts and observations on multiple facets of contemporary culture, from Facebook to Brexit, while intertwining philosophical and historical influences as well. Her arguments are intelligent and often profound, leading readers to consider issues in a fresh way. Some of the best portions of the book are when Smith delves into her own personal experiences. For example, in her essay “Love in the Gardens,” she reminisces of a trip to Italy with her father. In “Getting in and Out,” she discusses what it means to be biracial in today’s society and critiques trends in perception of race through an examination of Jordan Peele’s 2017 film “Get Out.” Whether one chooses to read through this collection in one continuous session or pick and choose from the essays, there is no wrong way to read “Feel Free.” Readers, writers and fans of contemporary culture alike will appreciate the insight that Smith offers. Her essays are rooted in fact but enlivened with personal touches; they’re understated, astute and will leave readers wanting to read more. With “Feel Free,” Zadie Smith has yet again shown her remarkable abilities as a writer. -Madeline Peterson Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
The medical area of the western side of the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus is pictured in an aerial view during autumn on Oct. 12, 2013. In the center is the UW Hospitals and Clinics. Clusters around the periphery, counter clockwise from far left, prominent campus facilities include the Waisman Center, American Family Children's Hospital, UW Medical Foundation Centennial Building, Veterans Administration Hospital, Signe Skott Cooper Hall, Renebohm Hall, Health Sciences Learning Center and Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research (WIMR). On the horizon, from left to right, is Lake Mendota, the downtown Madison skyline, Wisconsin State Capitol, and Lake Monona. The photograph was made from a helicopter looking northeast. (Photo by Jeff Miller/UW-Madison) Photo by Jeff Miller | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison climbs research ranking to sixth in 2024 The University of Wisconsin-Madison spent more than $1.7 billion in research expenditures for the first time, ranking sixth in research spending after years sitting at eighth place. By Ted Hyngstrom December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST The University of Wisconsin–Madison rose to sixth in research expenditure rankings published by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Nov. 25 after years of sitting at eighth place. UW–Madison surpassed $1.7 billion in research expenditures in 2023, its highest amount ever, according to the NSF Higher Education Research and Development survey. The NSF HERD is an annual census of U.S. colleges and universities that spent at least $150,000 in separately accounted for research and development in the fiscal year. The new ranking shows a two-spot increase over last year, along with an increase of over $208 million from July 2022-23. This is a 13.7% increase in research expenditures. Some of the largest expenditures included $29 million to study and treat diseases that cause blindness, $15 million over the next three years to increase artificial intelligence research and education and a $22.3 million award for the Population Health Institute in the UW School of Medicine and Public Health to expand work on community health, according to a UW-Madison statement. “UW-Madison has been a research powerhouse for generations,” UW–Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin said in the statement. “This latest increase in both our research expenditures and our HERD ranking is further evidence of our deep commitment to bringing incredible UW–Madison expertise across disciplines to the grand challenges of our time and to translating our discoveries to improve lives at home in Wisconsin and beyond.” The ranking increase marks a rise over the past decade. UW–Madison was ranked fourth in the nation for research spending in 2014 but had fallen to eighth by 2018, according to PBS Wisconsin. At the time, former UW–Madison Chancellor Rebecca Blank credited this fall to state funding cuts to the UW System. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Kayla Northway | The Daily Cardinal WOMEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin women’s basketball puts out the Flames 61-57 Women’s basketball wins in a nailbiter on Thursday night, junior Serah Williams surpasses 1000 career points. By Elizabeth Jacques November 26, 2024 | 1:39pm CST Wisconsin Badgers women’s basketball had a lot to celebrate after Thursday night’s game against the University of Illinois-Chicago Flames, coming out on top with a four-point victory, 61-57. Junior forward Serah Williams reached 1,000 career points in the Badgers’ win over the Flames. She is the 29th women’s basketball player to achieve this milestone and is the third fastest to do so, achieving it in only 66 games. Williams achieved her milestone in just the first quarter, but she just kept on going. She was the leading scorer of the night, dropping 20 points, to bring her career point total to 1,016. Williams also grabbed 14 rebounds, collecting the 25th double-double of her career. Sophomore center Carter McCray and graduate student guard Natalie Leuzinger helped Williams out with 10 points apiece. The game was a gritty one from both sides. In the first quarter, the teams combined for 21 points, Wisconsin leading 12-9. The Badgers forced three shot clock violations and held the Flames to a low shooting percentage. In the second quarter, it was all Badgers. They were able to keep the Flames to only scoring seven second-quarter points. This number is tied for the 10th fewest in Badgers program history. At the half, the Badgers led 25-16. After the half, it started to light up for both teams. The Badgers, thanks to rebounding, were able to keep their composure. In the fourth quarter, the Badgers led 35-31 in rebounding, which helped them pull away from this game entirely. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Republicans retain control of Assembly, state Senate in 2024 elections Despite some gains by Democrats in Wisconsin and the loss of an electoral supermajority, Republicans will still control both houses of the Legislature. By Annika Bereny and Gabriella Hartlaub November 6, 2024 | 6:28pm CST Republicans will still control both houses of the state Legislature after the 2024 general election, despite the loss of their electoral supermajority, following an election night that put new legislative maps to the test in Wisconsin. With 99% of votes reporting across Wisconsin, Republicans will hold a 54-45 majority in the state Assembly and a 18-15 majority in the Senate. Notably, Senate Republicans lost their supermajority, with Democrats picking up key wins in the eighth, 14th, 18th, 30th and 32nd Districts. Assembly remains in Republican control Four close races in Wisconsin have been called for Republicans, giving the Wisconsin GOP control of the Legislature once again. In the 85th Assembly District, Incumbent Rep. Patrick Snyder, R-Schofield, was elected to his fifth term in the Legislature, defeating challenger Yee Leng Xiong, a Democrat who would have been the first Hmong lawmaker in Wisconsin history, by 5%. In the past, Wausau has had a 52.6% Republican lean, and the district has been red since 2016 when Snyder was first elected to the Assembly. But the redrawing of legislative maps came after Gov. Tony Evers’ passed a proposal to redraw Wisconsin’s legislative maps on Feb. 19. The previous maps had been declared in a 4-3 decision as unconstitutional by the Wisconsin Supreme Court in late 2023. Snyder had been drawn out of his previous district but rented an apartment in the new 85th District throughout the election and vowed to the media that he would move if victorious. “Despite the best efforts of Governor Evers to gerrymander Rep. Snyder out of a community — by one block — that he has spent decades serving,” Snyder wrote in a press release following his victory. “Pat once again won reelection due to the faith the Wausau community put in him to be their voice in Madison.” In the 92nd Assembly District, which represents the Eau Claire and Chippewa Falls area, Republican Clint Moses has defeated Democratic challenger Joe Plouff by an 8% margin and about 2,000 votes. In the 88th and 94th Districts, however, the [races] were much closer, with just 200 votes separating candidates in each of the races. For the 94th District, which represents La Crosse and previously had a 53.6% Republican lean, Democratic incumbent Steve Doyle is expected to just barely eke out a win against Republican Ryan Huebsch in a rematch between the two after they faced off in 2022. Although the vote count currently stands at 100% reported, the margin of victory is close enough that a candidate may demand a recount. "With the new districting and the redistricting, we knew that this was going to be a tight race," Huebsch said. "Probably one of the tightest in the entire state.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email In the new 88th Assembly District, Republican Benjamin Franklin will also likely beat Democrat Christy Welch by a similar margin to Doyle’s, also opening the door to a potential recount, though Welch has said she will not request one. Franklin is a veteran and small business owner who grew up in Iowa but recently moved to Wisconsin, settling in De Pere which he will now represent in the State Assembly. Both he and Welch are newcomers to politics. The two candidates are still separated by just over 200 votes. Senate Republican majority remains, but Democrats pick up seats in key races Democrats protected their single contested State Senate seat and picked up three others in the 2024 general election. Multiple state Senate races were too close to call for most of the election night into the early morning, leading candidates to declare victory before any major outlets called the races in their favor. Democrat Sarah Keyeski in District 14 declared victory at 12:22 a.m., but the race was not called in her favor by the Associated Press until 1:22 a.m. Democrat Jodi Habush Sinykin declared victory around 3 a.m. with 95% of the vote counted, but the race is still too close to call as of Wednesday afternoon, according to the AP. Habush Sinykin is ahead in the 8th Senate District, which was previously two districts both represented by Republican state senators. Only one of those, Duey Strobel, ran against Habush Sinykin and lost by 2% of votes. According to WisPolitics, the district voted 53% Republican in the 2020 election. Keyeski won the 14th Senate District. She defeated Sen. Joan Ballweg, R-Markesan , who had represented the district since 2020 but was drawn out when the new maps were instated. Ballweg moved back into the new 14th District in order to run for the seat. “It is an honor to welcome Sarah Keyeski to the State Senate. Senate-elect Keyeski ran a successful campaign against a tough incumbent in one of the state’s most competitive districts,” Senate Democratic Leader Dianne Hesselbein said in a statement. In the 30th Senate District, Democrat Jamie Wall won by less than 5,000 votes against Republican candidate Jim Rafter. The 30th District, which includes all of Green Bay and De Pere, combined three Republican incumbents when it was redrawn. None of those candidates decided to run for the new state Senate seat in a new district that voted more than 52% Democratic in the 2020 election. The AP called the 18th Senate District race for Democrat Kristin Alfheim Wednesday afternoon. The district Alfheim now represents is a new district created by the 2022 redistricting efforts. The 18th district runs from Oshkosh to Appleton along Lake Winnebago. Sen. Brad Pfaff was the only state Senate Democrat up for reelection this year with a Republican challenger, but Pfaff managed to hang onto his seat in his redrawn district. Pfaff won with 53% of the vote, while Republican challenger Stacey Klein had 47% of the vote. According to WisPolitics, the district voted 54% Democratic in the 2020 election. Though Democrats had no chance of flipping the state Senate in this election, the pick-up of three seats puts them in a position to possibly gain control of the state Senate when another set of seats comes up for election in 2026. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Students walk, run and bike on East Campus Mall on April 15, 2023. Photo by Drake White-Bergey | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE Freshman year survival: What I wish I would’ve known By Adalyn Reichenberger September 19, 2024 | 2:00am CDT As a freshman, I remember being fairly overwhelmed but extremely excited as the school year began. It was not easy jumping into a new place full of new people, opportunities and expectations. Now, as a junior, I have taken time to reflect on my own experiences. With this, I decided to come up with a few important messages and lessons I have learned throughout the years. If I could go back in time and give my freshman self a few words of advice, I would tell her to read this article. First, it is important to understand you will most likely do poorly on a few assignments and exams. This is normal. It does not matter if you are ahead in credits, graduated top of your class or that you had a 4.2 GPA in high school. Being at the University of Wisconsin-Madison means every valedictorian and top student now sits next to you. This piece of information failed to humble me in Chemistry 103, as I received a 33% on an exam. I was studying for hours, going to office hours and still failing. Let me validate the fact that college at an esteemed university is not easy. Although it felt like the end of the world, I still passed the class and did even better in Chemistry 104. If you find yourself in this position, use it as a learning opportunity. Instead of beating yourself up over something you cannot change, use this as motivation to try something new. College is all about learning what works for you and what doesn’t. Mistakes will be made as no human is perfect. Everyone functions differently, meaning everyone learns differently. Take some time to research and practice new study habits as this can be extremely beneficial in your success. Say “yes.” I am sure you have heard this piece of advice time and time again, but I am here to reiterate the necessity of saying yes to new activities and people. Join clubs and activities, engage in class, and most notably, don’t be afraid to meet new people. I would recommend talking to as many people as you can, even if they seem like someone you wouldn’t usually talk to. You never know who you will meet, and what opportunities you will run into. While saying “yes” is great, saying “no” is just as important. Sometimes, for your own good, you need to say “no” and do what is best for you. Maybe you have hours of schoolwork to get done or you simply need some time to yourself. Remember the importance of independence and alone time because it greatly benefits your overall success. As time went on, I got more comfortable at school, and realized I didn’t need to be with someone at all times of the day. The more time I spent alone, the more I was able to coordinate my own needs. Maturing is realizing you can and should enjoy spending time with yourself. Finally, and most importantly, give it the whole year. The end of my first semester at UW-Madison was my mental lowest: finals, fights with roommates and a situationship to end all others. I felt like I had made a mistake coming to college in the first place. Had I not come back the next semester, I would have missed out on meeting the people I now consider family. By the end of the spring semester, I had to be dragged out of this city. Keeping my perspective on the exciting possibilities led me to the person I am today. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Broday and Bryant: As part of a national campus tour in support of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama, actors Adam Brody and Joy Bryant spoke to students at Memorial Union Wednesday. Photo by Katie Gibbs | and Katie Gibbs The Daily Cardinal ARTS Q&A: ‘We're seven days away from making history’: Actor Adam Brody rallies UW-Madison voters After an enthusiastic visit to the University of Wisconsin-Madison, actor and activist Adam Brody shares his insights on why young voters are crucial in shaping America's future. By Alaina Walsh October 29, 2024 | 6:30am CDT Actor Adam Brody, known for his role as Seth Cohen on the Fox series "The O.C" and most recently as Noah on "Nobody Wants This," hosted a student meet-and-greet on behalf of the Harris-Walz campaign in Madison on Sunday, where he spoke about Madison’s pivotal role in what he called “a historical election.” The Wisconsin Democratic Party hosted the event to encourage University of Wisconsin-Madison students to vote early, backing Vice President Kamala Harris for the upcoming Presidential election. Following the event, Brody spoke privately with small groups of students about their hopes for the election’s outcome. The Daily Cardinal spoke with Brody about why he thought Madison, specifically UW-Madison students, are important in this election, advice he’d give to first-time voters and what he’d take home as a keepsake from Wisconsin. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. How are you feeling about being in Madison? Lovely, enthused, energized and comforted by seeing so many energetic, enthusiastic people who are passionate and hopeful. Why do you think it is so important to talk to University of Wisconsin-Madison students specifically? Well, starting wider and zooming in, Wisconsin is a swing state, and I think students in general, with good reason, tend to lean more Democratic. At the same time, I thought that the participation wasn't going to be as strong. So there's a lot of room there to grow, to activate, to motivate and also they seem to be the people that are interested in talking to me. What would you say to students that are undecided about voting? There’s a list of priorities, policies, positions and rights that I personally care about. Perhaps we share these values or outlooks in common or not — reproductive freedom, the climate crisis, the homelessness problem and the lack of housing, the gun violence epidemic, democracy abroad. These are all big issues. But I would say, regardless of how you feel about any of those…we have a man who’s close to being in office, who is a pathological liar, who’s surrounded by enablers and millions of people that he’s whipped into a frenzy. I can’t highlight the danger of that enough, not just for all those priorities I just listed, but for keeping the lights on, for keeping the garbage trucks going, for staying out of a nuclear war. I mean, profound instability is mortally dangerous for every person on this planet. I am not just encouraging you to vote. That’s a must, because we are in a historic time. We’re seven days away from making history. So vote and knock on some doors, because you will remember these moments for the rest of your life. It’s that historical. Whatever happens, you'll remember where you were and what you did, and you'll be proud to say that you did something. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email To clarify, you’re urging young voters to vote based on facts, correct? I’m urging people to vote based on facts, for people who build a consensus and are surrounded by experts and are not just following the whim of one man and his imagination and…not somebody who leads with division. I mean, Trump openly denigrates half of Americans and half of American cities all the time. That’s not a leader for this country. You gotta be president for everyone. Celebrity endorsements can be powerful, so what would you say to students who are skeptical about the influence of celebrities in this election? There’s no reason that somebody needs to listen to me more than their neighbor, you know? Perhaps I can command a bit more attention, but that doesn’t mean that my opinion is any more valuable or wise. Looking back, what advice would you give to “young Adam Brody” when voting in a presidential election for the first time? Oh…do the midterms first. Do your local [elections]. Because the thing is, everyone gets involved in the presidential race, and it has a lot of impact. But if you want to impact your life the most, it’s like, who’s on the school board, who’s your local judge? Do local. Do local. Do local. Finally, if you could take one thing home from Madison, other than food, what would it be? [Laughs] I mean…a pet cow? Other than food, I don’t know what kind of goodies you have…Oh, the Electoral College votes! Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Hovde will not concede U.S. Senate race despite no evidence of fraud The Republican U.S. Senate candidate is one of two Republican Senate candidates nationwide who have yet to concede their races. By Tomer Ronen November 18, 2024 | 2:00am CST Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde has yet to concede in his race against Democratic incumbent Sen. Tammy Baldwin, despite the Associated Press calling the race for Baldwin on Nov. 6. Hovde, who lost by about 29,000 votes, received about 54,000 fewer votes than President-elect Donald Trump. Baldwin received about 5,000 more votes than Vice President Kamala Harris. Along with Arizona Republican Kari Lake, Hovde is one of two Republican U.S. Senate candidates who have yet to concede. In a video released on social media Nov. 12, Hovde said he was “shocked” by what happened on election night, claiming about 108,000 absentee ballots were counted in Milwaukee at 4 a.m., with Baldwin receiving nearly 90% of the votes. Because Milwaukee counts absentee ballots at a central location, reports are released all at once when counting is complete. Baldwin received about 80% of Milwaukee’s absentee votes, according to a Milwaukee Journal Sentinel fact check. Wisconsin’s biggest city is historically heavily Democratic, with Baldwin winning 71.5% of the vote against Wisconsin State Sen. Leah Vukmir in Milwaukee County in 2018. The Milwaukee Election Commission also had to recount about 34,000 ballots on Election Day after the doors of tabulator machines were not locked and sealed. Both parties agreed nothing wrong was done, according to Wisconsin Elections Commission Chair Ann Jacobs. Hovde also claimed certain precincts in Milwaukee had over 200% voter turnout, a claim the Wisconsin Elections Commission refuted in a Nov. 14 statement. “What happened in this election does not inspire confidence in our process, and that is wrong,” Hovde said. “Once all options are reviewed, I will announce my decision on how I will proceed.” In Wisconsin, candidates can only ask for a recount if they trail by one percentage point or less. In the official tally, Hovde currently trails Baldwin by 0.9%. Wisconsin precincts have until Nov. 19 to certify their results. “Eric Hovde is spreading lies from the darkest corners of the internet to undercut our free and fair elections,” Baldwin said in a Nov. 12 tweet. “Wisconsin voters made their voices heard. It's time for Hovde to stop this disgusting attack on our democracy and concede.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Courtesy of Netflix ARTS Heart of Stone: Another spy thriller that fails to impress By Vee Sridhar August 25, 2023 | 2:04pm CDT Movie audiences should start drastically lowering expectations to fully enjoy the latest spy thrillers being churned out by studios. Alas, audiences just keep setting themselves up to fail miserably in this regard. Heart of Stone, directed by Tom Harper and produced by Skydance Media, tries its best to not fall prey to avoid becoming another low quality spy thriller, but it ultimately can’t measure up to the standards set by films like Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy. The film stars the gorgeous Gal Gadot, who seems typecast and subsequently wasted in this movie. Also starring in the film were Jamie Dornan, Sophie Okonedo, Alia Bhatt, Paul Ready and Jing Lusi, of which the latter two feel criminally underused. The movie is about an organization called the Charter, the most secret of all secret-agent organizations, that defends the world from threats no government knows or responds to, like dealing with hackers targeting the North American power grid. Heart of Stone starts off very Mission Impossible-esque — MI6 agents Rachel Stone (Gadot), Parker (Dornan), Bailey (Ready) and Yang (Lusi) are on a mission to nab a dangerous weapons dealer. But through the course of the mission it’s revealed that Rachel isn’t just an ordinary tech agent — she’s an double agent in MI6 who actually works for the Charter, which possesses the Heart, an AI capable of processing trillions of terabytes of data at the same time. However, MI6 fails to catch the weapons dealer due to the interference of Keya Dhawan, a 22-year old hacker extraordinaire with a completely whitewashed name for an Indian woman. And so the hunt begins for Dhawanl, digging up her past and trying to predict her course of action with the Heart, which also predicts success rates of missions and their outcomes. With its help, the group tracks her to Lisbon. After an attack by mercenaries, the big twist is revealed — Parker orchestrated the entire ordeal to find out who the Charter agent is among the team. I must confess — I was actually taken aback at this point. Though his character is a little cliché, I do appreciate Dornan’s acting prowess. He was probably the character I most enjoyed. While Gadot is suave and sleek, Dornan stole the show with his unapologetic villainy. Like many villains, Parker believes he’s doing the world a favor, ridding it of the “higher ups” that don’t treat their soldiers like humans only to hypocritically violate his own preachings by killing both Bailey and Yang (cue backstory that shows his whole team being wiped out for the “greater good”). Apparently, the rules don’t apply to him. Rachel also says something to this effect in the climax: “You don’t want to change anything. You just want to be the one in charge”. His story is one of countless good-agent-turns-evil-agent arcs, with nothing new to explain his abrupt switch to the dark side except a three minute conversation about how he was left for dead by the Charter after a fiasco. Despite being a soldier, Parker does not understand the concept of unintended collateral damage. While 40% of the movie is Gadot talking to her handler Nomad (Okonedo), a.k.a. King of Hearts, giving pep talks to Keya and getting injured, the other 60% is pure action embodied in scenes where, for instance, she jumps off a military plane in a squirrel suit onto a satellite (which was kind of cool but also just too much for even Gadot to stylishly pull off). While I understand that this is what thrillers have been and are expected to be, I couldn’t help but be disappointed by it. It felt like a movie in a long line of movies that run on the same formula, and there was nothing new to it. That being said, I will acknowledge and appreciate the performances that stood out to me as well as the ones I think should’ve been explored further — especially that of Paul Ready’s Bailey and Jing Lusi’s Yang. I felt they could’ve deepened the film’s emotional dimension. Even though it would still be Gadot’s movie, fleshing out their characters would have certainly improved the experience. In a (supposed) nod to diversity, the makers cast an Israeli woman as the lead, and an Indian woman as the antagonist. However, neither of their identities seem to have much of an impact on the movie. The creators tried to diversify the faces seen on TV, yes, but in following the procedure of color-blind casting they’ve also limited the impact that race and identity could’ve had — Keya’s whole motive is to get revenge for her parents dying in a medical trial, but what does that mean for a girl from India? What taunts and miseries did she have to face growing up? I think the plot would’ve only benefited from exploring Keya, Rachel and Parker’s stories more, rather than always focusing on the present. In the end, Heart of Stone tries to be the new Mission Impossible but fails to do so convincingly. I would suggest putting it on if you’re in the mood for some action, but it’s okay not to be glued to your seat either. Heart of Stone is currently streaming on Netflix. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
Courtesy of the International Crane Foundation SCIENCE Ride in style with new ‘Cranes of Wisconsin’ license plate Last month, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation released a new “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate, with purchases directly supporting the International Crane Foundation’s work in the state. By Kayla Northway November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST Wisconsinites can now purchase the new “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate featuring two species of cranes native to North America and Wisconsin: the sandhill crane and the endangered whooping crane. Wisconsin artist Jay Jocham designed the plate, and strives to raise awareness for endangered wildlife and habitats through his art. For over 37 years, he has created art that has helped conservation groups fund programs to protect wildlife. Jocham has done work for the International Crane Foundation previously, including a series of six murals totaling over 1,100 feet in 2020, which are displayed at the International Crane Foundation’s headquarters. Sandhill cranes and whooping cranes are two crane species found in Wisconsin and throughout North America. It’s estimated that there are at least 40,000 sandhill cranes in Wisconsin and their population is steadily increasing. Historically, whooping cranes were hunted for hat-making, trophy hunting, museum collections, sustenance and recreation. In the early 1900s, settlers also overtook the crane’s wetland breeding grounds and native prairies for farming, leaving whooping cranes on the brink of extinction with only 21 individuals left in the wild. Fortunately, that number has since grown to approximately 836 whooping cranes alive today. Whooping cranes are still endangered, but their rise in numbers is largely due to the International Crane Foundation’s conservation efforts to reintroduce an experimental flock of whooping cranes to Wisconsin’s wetlands starting in 2001. Known as the Eastern Migratory Population, this population hosts nearly 80 whooping cranes to date. For each ‘Cranes of Wisconsin’ license plate purchased and subsequent annual registration, the International Crane Foundation will receive a $25 tax deductible donation. Funds from the license plate will support two of the foundation’s “key projects” in Wisconsin: the continued efforts to reintroduce the whooping crane and the resolution of crop damage caused by sandhill cranes. “The issue of crop damage by cranes is one of great importance here in Wisconsin,” Dr. Rich Beilfuss, president and CEO of the International Crane Foundation, said in a statement. “Our Wisconsin team is working hard to ensure that farmers get the help they need through in-the-field farmer outreach and policy advocacy. This Cranes of Wisconsin license plate will further that mission.” The International Crane Foundation has a nearly 300-acre headquarters in Baraboo, Wisconsin, as well as offices and staff all around the globe, including China, Uganda, Kenya, Zambia, South Africa and Texas. The Foundation works worldwide to conserve cranes and the ecosystems, watersheds and flyways on which they depend by providing knowledge, leadership and inspiration to engage people in resolving threats to cranes and their diverse landscapes. In Wisconsin, the most commonly reported crop damage by sandhill cranes is feeding on recently planted corn seed. According to Sandhill Crane Ecology & Damage Management, when large flocks of cranes feed on planted fields, the damage they cause to an unprotected crop can be severe enough to force the farmer to replant the entire field. Sandhill cranes are experts at using their long beaks and finding planted agricultural seeds such as corn. They remove individual corn seeds within the first few weeks after planting and continue to feed on the germinating seed until the corn plant reaches four to eight inches in height. The International Crane Foundation has worked in Wisconsin’s agricultural communities for three decades to resolve the issue of crop damage by cranes, and it was especially instrumental in field-testing to prove the effectiveness of Avipel seed treatment, a non-toxic deterrent that prevents cranes from consuming freshly-planted corn seed, the news release said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email To purchase the International Crane Foundation’s “Cranes of Wisconsin” license plate and see what vehicles qualify, please visit Wisconsin Department of Transportation’s website. For more information about the International Crane Foundation and how you can help, please visit: https://savingcranes.org/. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
The Democratic Party of Wisconsin hosted an early voting block party at UW-Madison’s Library Mall on Friday. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal News Catch me feds! I ballot stuffed 450 times in the 2024 election To feel the passion of Democracy I voted between three states for both Kamala and Donald. By Peter Pricket November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Come catch me, feds! I voted 450 times in Wisconsin, Iowa and Pennsylvania. I truly just want to feel extra involved with civic engagement and show my passion for democracy this election. And when I heard people were double or triple voting in 2020, I thought, ‘I need to step it up, get these numbers up!’ I stuffed about 100 in Wisconsin — 50 in Dane County and 50 in Door County — those will go to Vice President Kamala Harris. I did a little embezzlement with company funds to travel to Philly and ballot stuffed 200 more times for Kamala. I love the libs lol. I also think, however, democracy prevails best when it is equitable, so I voted an additional 100 times in Pennsylvania for Donald Trump, just to keep people on their toes. You must be wondering, ‘Peter, how did Ann Selzer's poll have Harris in the lead in Iowa?’ Well, I must say that is all me. I stuffed all the rest of my ballots for Harris in Iowa in an effort to spin back the Obama 2008 electoral map. This took so much work. My printer was backed up and at full speed, but I kept reminding myself to do this for Obama. Now, one thing about me is I’m a bit hot headed. My friend Libby Demi only voted once, and she went back home to Vancouver, Washington to cast her ballot. Are you fucking with me? So, I used company funds once more and lit the ballot box on fire where she put her vote in. I actually was disgruntled and shocked that this unshowered progressive did not use her only ID to vote in Wisconsin. Yuck! Libby Demi is a flop in many ways — I mean, did anyone forget the Shannon Hall incident? — so I hope I taught her a lesson. But you know what. At least that woke abortion queen voted. And you should too. I hope you voted once, twice or 450 times on Election Day. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More I graduated from PETA University. Now I electroejaculate monkeys I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university An ode to freedom (more lanes)
Photo by Drake White-Bergey | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Eastern European students willing to give Trump a shot on ending Russo-Ukraine war Eastern European University of Wisconsin-Madison students are open to President-elect Trump’s promises to end Russia’s war in Ukraine. By Peter Fishman December 5, 2024 | 3:00am CST Many Eastern European University of Wisconsin-Madison students who went to the polls for the 2024 election paid close attention to the candidates' foreign policy stances on Russia’s war in Ukraine and came away with a favorite. “Overall, I was more receptive of Trump’s stance [because] I feel that Ukraine, even with arms support, doesn’t have the military capacity to take back more land and risks losing more [in a prolonged war],” said Mikhail, a UW-Madison sophomore originally from Austin, adding this view informed his vote. Mikhail isn’t alone in his reasoning. While some Eastern European UW-Madison students expressed skepticism of Trump’s unpredictability, many students told the Cardinal they were willing to give Trump a chance to bring a quick end to Russia’s war in Ukraine. Trump's pledge to end war attracts student support Since Feb. 24, 2022, when Russian President Vladimir Putin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the war has become a flashpoint in American politics. The incumbent Biden administration has been a staunch defender of Ukraine, spending $106 billion in direct military aid which has helped the beleaguered country reclaim more than half of the territory Russia had taken since 2022. In contrast, Trump has refused to say whether he wants Ukraine to win the war but has said he would end the war during his first day in office. UW-Madison sophomore Georgii Sukhotin, originally from the suburbs of Moscow, didn’t vote in the 2024 election but said he appreciated Trump’s “initiative” in brokering a swift end to the war. “He showed real interest in ending this war and this is what’s most important for me,” Sukhotin said, adding he doubted Ukraine could currently defeat Russia. “I don’t want more deaths, more fighting.” Other students said Trump’s approach to diplomacy appealed to them. UW-Madison junior Yaroslav Polyakov, a Muscovite Jew, said Biden’s aid to Ukraine has been insufficient and “minimal” in bringing an end to the war, while Trump would take decisive action. “He’s not afraid to sit at the same table with dictators like Putin and Kim Jong-Un,” Polyakov said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Trump’s ‘unpredictability’ sparks concern While students said they were open to Trump taking action to end the war, some expressed concern over how Trump would accomplish that. Mikhail said his mom, a Russian-speaking Ukrainian from Kharkiv, disliked Trump’s “unpredictability” and potential he would “discard” Ukraine. A Russian UW-Madison freshman, who requested to remain anonymous, echoed these concerns adding her belief that Trump would force an unequal deal on Ukraine. “Trump will probably push Ukraine to give up the four occupied provinces to Russia in exchange for peace,” she said. However, she said Trump would be a stronger negotiator than Biden. Despite Trump’s pledges to cut aid to Ukraine, Polyakov voiced his belief that the Trump administration wouldn’t cease support. “It’s obvious Trump will continue to support Ukraine in some form even if he claimed he’d stop sending weapons and money,” said Polyakov. Why they voted for Trump For some Eastern Europeans, the Democratic Party’s perceived promotion of “big government” values and support for social movements seemed foreign. UW-Madison junior Andrei Vardanyan, from Armenia, voiced his belief that most Eastern European immigrants voted for Trump due to his outlook on the LGBTQ community. “For those with post-Soviet outlooks, LGBT diversity is alien to them,” Vardanyan said. “Trump’s rhetoric that there are only two genders was more appealing to them, in my opinion.” “While many Democrats are for societal progress by backing movements like BLM, Trans Lives Matter, and so on, many older post-Soviet people don’t understand these movements since promotions of such social issues didn’t exist back in the USSR,” said Mikhail. “As a result, they think Republicans are less radical or more moderate than Democrats.” Regarding pro-Russian or pro-Ukrainian sympathies, Vardanyan also drew comparisons between Eastern European youth in the U.S. and in Armenia. Support for Ukraine is a “generational” issue, Vardanyan said. “The parents are more conservative and pro-Russian while the kids are largely liberal, sometimes even radically liberal, and more pro-western.” Students see a murky future regardless of who’s in office While desires to end the war were clear among all the students the Cardinal interviewed, no one is certain what the results of these peace talks would be and how it would shape the region for years to come. A likely subject held over peace talks would be the status of the five provinces of Crimea, Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhia and Kherson, all occupied by Russian forces. Last year, Ukrainian president Volodymor Zelenskyy said Ukraine had no plans to stop fighting until all of Ukraine’s territories were recaptured. Vardanyan believes peace with Russia would only be temporary before a new war with imperialist aims would erupt. “If Russia wins the war and integrates parts of Ukraine into its territory, it won’t stop. Belarus will be next to fall, then Georgia, then Armenia, and likely the Central Asian countries too.” Sukhotin is among the 650,000 emigres who left Russia in the wake of the mobilization order. Prior to moving to the U.S., he lived in Portugal, a popular destination for Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian expats. He longs for the war to end so that he might return home and be reunited with his family. “I hope everything will return to a state of normalcy at some point.” Sukhotin said. Polyakov expressed a similar sentiment. “I hope this horrible war ends soon,” Polyakov said. “I miss my family, and with the ongoing war, I don’t have a chance to see them.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of Greg Marks/NOAA Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory/Flickr Quagga mussels from a fish trawl sample photographed in Lake Michigan, August 2006. SCIENCE Discovery of invasive mussels in Lake Geneva deepens Wisconsin’s water crisis Quagga mussels, an invasive species first discovered in Lake Geneva last month, threaten the ecological balance of Wisconsin’s lakes and motivate new conservation efforts. By Elaina Russell September 26, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In a concerning development for Wisconsin’s cherished lakes, local and state officials discovered invasive quagga mussels in Geneva Lake last month, marking the first recorded presence of this species in an inland lake in the state. The find, confirmed by the Geneva Lake Environmental Agency (GLEA) after routine monitoring, raised significant environmental concerns among advocates and local communities alike. What are quagga mussels? Quagga mussels (Dreissena rostriformis bugensis), native to the Dnieper River in Ukraine, were first introduced to the Great Lakes in 1989, likely through ballast water from international shipping. They have spread rapidly across North America since then, outcompeting native species and disrupting local ecosystems. Unlike zebra mussels, another invasive species that poses a threat to freshwater environments, quagga mussels have demonstrated a greater capacity for adaptation and resilience. They thrive in colder, deeper waters, allowing them to inhabit a broader range of ecosystems. “Knowing what we know about quaggas and their ability to live on soft bottoms, it will be very important to monitor how they do in inland lakes,” said Jake Vander Zanden, professor and director of the Center of Limnology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Quagga mussels can also filter vast amounts of water, leading to increased clarity but ultimately reducing the population of phytoplankton that are crucial for the food web. As these mussels proliferate, they can alter nutrient cycles and affect the growth of aquatic plants and animals, potentially leading to significant ecological imbalances. Quagga mussels disrupt local ecosystems The introduction of quagga mussels into Geneva Lake raised alarms about the potential ecological repercussions not just for the lake itself, but for Wisconsin’s waterways as a whole, including Lake Mendota. As the largest lake in the Madison area, Lake Mendota is home to a diverse array of fish and other aquatic organisms. The interconnectedness of Wisconsin’s waterways means that an invasive species in one lake can easily spread to another through boat traffic, fishing gear or natural water movements. Lake Mendota faces its own set of challenges from invasive species, such as zebra mussels and the spiny water flea, which have already disrupted local ecosystems. The introduction of quagga mussels could exacerbate these issues, further threatening the lake’s biodiversity and the recreational activities that depend on it. Anglers, boaters and nature enthusiasts who frequent these waters may find their experiences diminished as invasive species take hold. Discovery sparks community conservation efforts Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The discovery of quagga mussels in Geneva Lake galvanized local communities and environmental advocates to take action. James Olson, a Wisconsin resident and attorney at LawtonCates, is spearheading an essential environmental initiative focused on addressing the critical issue of aquatic invasive species in the state’s lakes. This initiative centers around the “home lake” rule and targets wake boats, which can unintentionally transport invasive species between water bodies. Olson is joined by his paralegal, Kelsie Kufhal, who plays a crucial role in supporting this initiative. The initiative highlights the urgent need for preventive measures in response to the recent discovery of quagga mussels in Geneva Lake. Olson encourages community members to participate in monitoring efforts and practices for preventing the spread of invasive species. Collaboration among local agencies, environmental organizations and state officials will be crucial in developing effective management strategies. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources is expected to play a significant role in these efforts. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
The Democratic Party of Wisconsin hosted an early voting block party at UW-Madison’s Library Mall on Friday. Photo by Jake Piper | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE Post-election slump: Finding motivation in a time of uncertainty The week after the election could lead some of us to feel unmotivated, or down. But even amid the disappointment, we know our voices matter now more than ever. By Alexandra Malatesta November 14, 2024 | 2:00am CST It’s been eight days since the United States elected its 47th president, yet the echoes of that night still resonate. Picture this: MSNBC’s Jen Psaki analyzing Wisconsin, a key state, announcing a victory for Donald Trump — a jarring twist of events, only moments before the final call. That dreary Wednesday that dawned, dark and heavy, will be etched in my memory. It all felt oddly familiar, like a haunting echo of 2016. Yet this time, the stakes feel sharper, closer, more personal. In 2016, my biggest concern was how I was supposed to balance sports while studying for my sixth-grade history test. Today, as I stand on the cusp of life-shaping decisions, entering adulthood as a young woman, the weight of these results hits deeper, anchoring me in a moment that feels both pivotal and painfully uncertain. For many of us, especially women, this past week has been a whirlwind of emotions: shock, disappointment and an unsettling sense of loss. That morning brought a flood of questions: What now? Will we be safe? Is our world about to shift in ways we aren’t prepared for? Vice President Kamala Harris’ words cut through the tension, and through tear-filled eyes, we listened — a promise that the work of generations isn’t undone. “This is a time to roll up our sleeves. This is a time to organize, to mobilize and to stay engaged for the sake of freedom and justice and the future that we all know we can build together,” Harris said in her concession speech at Howard University. Let me just say, today is not the day to give up. Hold fast to your values. Don’t underestimate the strength in your beliefs or the profound impact of understanding what your vote truly means. Many cast their ballots and brought real change, and even if these weren’t the results we hoped for, don't lose faith in the power of your voice. This is a moment that demands resilience, not resignation. This is a reminder that democracy is a marathon, not a sprint. Change rarely happens all at once. It unfolds through sustained efforts, countless voices and a steady, determined work of those who refuse to settle for anything less than equality. We are the continuation of a long line of advocates who’ve kept pushing forward, and that spirit endures in each of us today. The path to progress is winding, and moments like this only highlight the need to stay engaged, informed and ready to contribute, no matter the setback. So let this moment be fuel, not defeat. The fight for justice and equal representation belongs to all of us, and every voice — every vote — matters more than ever. Now is the time to stay active, and bring our communities together. Don’t let this result disrupt or stop your daily routine in any way. When history looks back on this moment, let it see that we didn’t let disappointment silence us. Instead, be motivated by our belief in a future that includes and honors all of us. This work is far from over, and our voices are just beginning. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo courtesy of the Wisconsin Film Festival. ARTS A claustrophobic, surprisingly funny thriller from the Wisconsin Film Festival By Spencer Ball May 25, 2023 | 8:12pm CDT Chan-woo takes a night off studying for his police exam to go drinking with old friends. The next thing he knows, he’s waking up in the apartment next door with a violent hangover, a cracked phone screen, a bruise on his cheek — and a dead body on the floor. “Next Door,” a student film by South Korean director Yeom Ji-ho, takes place almost entirely within two neighboring apartments as Chan-woo pieces together the events of the previous night while avoiding suspicion of any wrongdoing himself. In a lesser film, this restricted setting would do little more than signify a low production budget. But “Next Door” fully capitalizes on its cramped space for dramatic effect, keeping its characters trapped within the confines of doors, windows, and closets. The screenplay and cinematography work in tandem to turn an average student apartment into a pressure cooker, creating an unyielding air of suspense even when the next threat is yet to be revealed. Despite its premise and claustrophobic nature, “Next Door” is far from a gritty crime story. Chan-woo may be studying to become a cop, but he’s failed the exam several times, and this is clearly his first brush with a real crime scene. Additionally, the film maintains an ironic sense of comedy throughout. The overwhelmed and easily distracted protagonist can never quite piece anything together without help from an outside source. With a film of this nature, a twist is inevitable. “Next Door” is well aware of this fact and uses it to manipulate audience expectations. The first half of the film spends so much time hinting towards the most obvious twist that viewers are as blindsided as Chan-woo when something unexpected does happen. The film’s carefully crafted narration keeps the audience guessing and accentuates the suspense with healthy doses of ambiguity and distrust. These elements combine to create a surprisingly unique tone that defies easy classification. “Next Door” isn’t a pure thriller, black comedy or satire, but a cleverly crafted tale of deduction and morality in a confusing situation. The film is less concerned with formal genre conventions, instead choosing to provoke a series of visceral reactions, whether they be laughs, gasps or bated breaths. “Next Door” is not the kind of movie you’ll talk about years later. But its smart writing, cinematography and editing add up to a solid comedy thriller that’s well worth its 90-minute runtime. Grade: B Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Assistant Professor Jean Laurenz plays the trumpet at "Descended" on October 20, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Ellie Huber | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey A literary giant and Laurenz’ ancestor, Lafcadio Hearn’s compelling insights on the depths of humankind and the paranormal are the inspiration behind the show. By Ellie Huber December 3, 2024 | 2:00am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison assistant professor of trumpet Jean Laurenz created “DESCENDED,” a multimedia show of chamber music, theatrical performance and film that played at the Memorial Union Black Box theater on Oct. 19 and 20. The show aims to take its audience on a spiritual quest to the paranormal and an otherworldly state of mind. “It’s about what happens when we, in our real physical lives, hit that membrane or cross over into that space of the beyond,” Laurenz told The Daily Cardinal. “Of the things that we'll never be able to touch, whether it's the moon or our spiritual ponderings […] We can find beauty within fear.” Laurenz fills the room with vocals and her trumpet and is joined by professional musicians Maria Finkelheier and Greg Jukes. The three co-direct and are featured in this 55-minute show, with visuals by Xuan, the film by Four/Ten Media and music by Finkelmeier. Their work has amassed 15 nominations and awards, including from the Wisconsin Film Festival. Laurenz’ great-great uncle and accomplished writer Lafcadio Hearn is the muse behind “DESCENDED.” A 19th century journalist, wayward traveler, teacher and meta-folk-ghost-story writer, Hearn followed his heart into the unknown. Hearn’s metaphysical literature explores paranormal and dissonant cognitive states, and Laurenz found peace through his story as she navigated the uncertainties of a career in the arts. “I found a lot of hope and inspiration in how one can build a beautiful life that wanders,” Laurenz said. “It gave me so much comfort just to know that I come from somebody like that.” In their post-performance Q&A, the artists shared how liberating they feel letting go of the sheet music and focusing on gestures and the narrative arc. Rather than sticking to a rigid plan, they bring about authentic evocations, connecting to their storytelling on a deeply emotional level. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Madison Esports is a club for competitive and casual players alike. Photo by Image courtesy of Madison Esports Club Facebook Page | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS From one ‘League’ to many: A look at the Madison Esports Club By Brandon Arbuckle May 4, 2018 | 10:00am CDT Less than two weeks ago, 680,000 concurrent viewers watched Richard “Ninja” Blevins play “Fortnite: Battle Royale” on Twitch, a new record for the video platform. It was a record Blevins had already broken back in March, when 628,000 watched him play the same game with rap mogul Drake. Another milestone occurred last year, as the “League of Legends” Mid-Season Invitational more than tripled the number of Super Bowl viewers. With a larger audience than ever, video games are as much a mainstay of pop culture as music and film. The industry is no longer limited to niche crowds. A recent Pew study revealed 50 percent of college students play video games often or occasionally. For the students who do, UW-Madison has no shortage of clubs to join. Jared Simonsen, president of the Madison Esports Club, sat down with us to discuss the rising popularity of competitive video games. When the club was founded in 2009, it centered around a single game — “League of Legends,” a multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA) released that same year. “League’s” success has been essential in evolving the competitive scene. Today, the student organization has expanded to having teams for eight different games — nine, if we're counting “Tom Clancy’s Rainbow Six Siege,” a game whose team is still in search of collegiate tournaments. According to Simonsen, there are three main factors to decide which games the club will compete in: “Outlets to play, community to play with and someone taking the lead to find those tournaments and organize a team.” While video game systems are brought to the club’s social events, competitions are played exclusively on PC: It’s why there are no teams for “Battlefield,” “Call of Duty” or other titles with predominantly console-based communities. “We looked into having ‘Call of Duty’ when ‘Black Ops 3’ was out, but all of ‘Black Ops 3’s’ tournaments were run through PS4, so it was really hard to organize that [and] form a team that could practice together,” Simonsen said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email There are still console games with a strong competitive presence. “Super Smash Bros.” is an established esport, but other Nintendo titles like “Splatoon 2” and “Arms” are not — even though they want to be. This tends to complicate esports as a whole. “Although it’s growing [and] has all this support, it’s a weird medium because it has to have both support from the developers and the fanbase wanting to compete,” Simonsen said. “It’s very interesting to see what becomes an esport.” With the explosive success of “Fortnite” and the battle royale genre as a whole, there are sure to be more teams added to the club — as was the case with “PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds.” Only time will tell what other titles end up joining the current lineup. Madison Esports has also expanded its event opportunities, as the club has gone from hosting in-house LAN parties to travelling nationwide for tournaments. Other universities have made even greater strides to legitimize the medium. In 2016, the University of California, Irvine opened a 3,500 square foot arena on campus for the school’s esports teams. Simonsen toured the arena this past summer as part of a leadership conference, with Blizzard Entertainment — the creators of “Overwatch,” “Heroes of the Storm” and “Hearthstone” — covering travel expenses. With over 70 high-end computers complete with Logitech accessories and Vertagear gaming chairs, Simonsen said it’s “the dream of what every school should strive to look like for an esports facility.” Whereas college athletes get scholarships from their respective schools, members of esports teams receive similar funding from third parties. Last year, all six players from Madison’s Division 1 “League of Legends” team were awarded with $6,000 scholarships from developer Riot Games. The club is also partnered with Tespa, a nonprofit collegiate esports organization affiliated with Blizzard Entertainment. This partnership allows UW-Madison’s teams to compete against other universities throughout North America. Promoting Madison Esports on social media has played a pivotal role in recruiting new members. Simonsen said prospective students have actually reached out to the club and made their decision to attend UW-Madison for the chance to play on a Big Ten team. The club’s competitions are often streamed online, providing another way to experience tournaments for students who wish to spectate instead of participate. In past interviews, Simonsen has been asked why people would want to do this. He normally responded to the question with a question: “Why do you watch sports?” It’s an interesting parallel to draw, as most of us aren’t questioned about watching football or basketball games when we could be playing these sports ourselves. When it comes to whether esports should be considered the same as traditional sports, Simonsen explained how its supporters are of two different mindsets: There are those who want it to be viewed in the same light as any other sport, and there are those who simply want it legitimized as a form of competition rather than stigmatized. Simonsen shares the latter sentiment, as many in the esports community hope to attain this legitimacy. “I want it to be seen and not questioned,” Simonsen said. “It’s not just people sitting playing video games, it’s people who are trying to become the best [and] want to represent a school or something more. Being able to recognize that is one of the biggest things I want to see in the future.” One organization that has acknowledged this recognition is the NBA, which began the inaugural season for its NBA 2K League this past Tuesday. The Milwaukee Bucks and 16 other basketball teams from the league have formed esports groups and drafted players to compete in “NBA 2K18,” further showcasing the mainstream growth of competitive video games. As esports continue to become more popular, so, too, will organizations like the NBA 2K League. For UW students with an interest in the medium, the Madison Esports Club is a great place to start. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More 19 arrested after pro-Palestine protesters interrupt Board of Regents meeting Instructors from conservative law firm will teach UW law course, drawing student criticism World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit
Photo by Jonathan Mintz | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center The defeat marks the first loss of the No. 11 Wisconsin men’s basketball team’s season. By Jacob Szczap December 7, 2024 | 10:01am CST The No. 11 Wisconsin men’s basketball team couldn’t keep their spark alive Tuesday night to beat the Michigan Wolverine in a hard battle, falling 67-64. The game featured two teams with pairs of seven-footers, and down the stretch, Michigan’s duo of giants emerged victorious. During a back-and-forth second half that featured nine lead changes, the Badgers ultimately couldn’t contain Michigan’s partnership of forward Danny Wolf and center Vladislav Goldin. The loss marks the first for Wisconsin, now 8-1 (0-1 Big Ten). The Wolverines improved to 7-1 (1-0 Big Ten). Wolf and Goldin accounted for 44 of the Wolverines’ 67 points, paving the way to a victory and frustrating Wisconsin head coach Greg Gard and an arena full of Badgers fans. With one Wisconsin seven-footer, forward Steven Crowl, caught up in foul trouble and eventually fouling out with just over three minutes left in the game, the duo’s constant attacking with ball screens was too much for the other forward Nolan Winter and the Badgers defense to handle. Over the game’s final two minutes and 23 seconds, Goldin scored the final six points, finishing with a game-high 24. "We just weren't physical enough, weren't intent on the ball screen with what we were doing,” Winter said after the game. “It's on both of us as bigs, and we know that. We've already talked, and we know we have to be better, and Steve [Crowl] knows he has to stay out of foul trouble because we need him and the presence that he brings us.” Meanwhile, Wisconsin’s offense crumpled as Goldin hit big shots down the stretch. While trailing late in the game, the Badgers got decent looks from guard Max Klesmit on three separate possessions, but the senior failed to cash in on each attempt, capping off a tough evening offensively. Klesmit shot 3-14 from the field, including 1-9 from three, and finished with eight points. “Max has made those shots before,” Gard said after the game. “He’s in a slump right now, we’re gonna help him get out of it.” On a testy night offensively, the guard play of John Tonje and John Blackwell led Wisconsin. Tonje finished with 18 points on 5-12 shooting, three rebounds and three assists while Blackwell scored 16 points on 6-12 shooting and accumulated a team-high nine rebounds. Winter, Klesmit and guard Kamari McGee added eight points each. The Badgers shot 22-64 from the field and a mere 6-27 from three. In the first half, Wisconsin received a well-distributed scoring performance from Winter, Tonje, Klesmit and Blackwell, each scoring six points en route to a 32-26 halftime lead. Even as Tonje’s first-half minutes were limited due to foul trouble, Wisconsin’s offense looked formidable without their leader. After Tonje subbed out of the game with 6:26 remaining in the half, the Badgers rattled off an impressive 10-0 run, capped off by a pair of assisted dunks from Winter that put them ahead 29-20. At that point, the Badgers had done a decent job containing Wolf and Goldin and had played mostly well-connected, in-sync defense. While Wolf and Goldin accounted for 16 of the Wolverines’ 26 first-half points, the Badgers did a phenomenal job locking down the perimeter. Michigan shot only 7-33 from the field and 2-16 from three in the first half, finishing the half on a 7:42 field goal drought with 11 straight misses. But in the second half, Michigan’s offense began to pick up, relying more on Goldin and Wolf, giving Wisconsin’s defense plenty of issues. In the half’s first five minutes, Goldin got hot fast, quickly scoring ten points to guide Michigan to a 42-41 lead. Mixed in was a three-pointer from Wolf that demonstrated his ability score in a variety of ways. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email With the game tight, and Michigan’s offense heating up, Blackwell began to lead Wisconsin’s offense. On three consecutive possessions, Blackwell delivered big-time buckets, putting back a couple of second-chance layups before hitting a smooth pull-up jumper with 12:19 left to make the score 47-44 Wisconsin. For the next few minutes, the Badgers and Wolverines continued to trade baskets, Tonje hitting free throws and a three to re-take the lead at 55-54 on a physical and-one bucket and a made free throw from McGee with 7:11 remaining. But 19 seconds later, Crowl picked up his fourth foul and was immediately replaced by Winter. With the game tied at 55, Winter then lost the ball on offense, resulting in a turnover, got caught in no-man’s land on defense on a Wolf lay-up and was then blocked by Michigan guard Roddy Gayle Jr. after passing up a wide-open wing three. Then, after Wolf and Blackwell traded multiple buckets and Gayle Jr. made a lay-up, McGee hit another huge shot — this time a three — to give Wisconsin a 62-61 lead with 4:14 remaining. But Wisconsin would only convert on one more field goal all night, a Klesmit turn-around jumper to give the Badgers a three-point advantage with 2:37 remaining. With Crowl fouled out, Goldin went to work in the paint and flipped the tide in favor of the Wolverines. Wisconsin had multiple chances in the game’s final moments but failed to convert. In a game that could have gone either way, Wisconsin fell. After the loss, Wisconsin seemed frustrated but not shaken and will now have to soak in its first true adversity of the season before their toughest test of the season thus far. The Badgers head to Milwaukee on Dec. 7 to take on in-state rival No. 5 Marquette. “I think we are going to respond great,” Blackwell said after the loss. “I think we have a great group of vets who have been through this. I mean, you're not going to win every game. We're going to be just fine. We're going to build off this loss, take it on the chin and just keep moving forward." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Courtesy of Flickr | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET Tenacious TikTok cleaning recipes to blast the stains away Destroy dastardly stains with war-like power from some of TikTok's best at-home cleaning solutions. By Omar Waheed February 2, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Your apartment is dirty, the stains won’t come out of the carpet and you want your security deposit back. You’ve tried all the telltale solutions, but social media has time and time again brought us enlightenment with easy, at-home recipes to fight the war on grime. The Beet has gathered cleaning solution recipes from CleanTok with easily accessible ingredients you either already have at home or can nab from your local store for a cheap, long-lasting powerful alternative to cleaners with an ungodly amount of chemicals. Disclaimer: All of these recipes will kill you. Carpet stain remover Bleach is a wonderful cleaner — albeit dangerous around colored clothing — and vinegar has proven to be an effective agent to get those tough stains out. Why not combine both? If one is good, then two is better. Mix equal parts bleach and vinegar to create an easy way to dissolve those dirty stains away. To reduce the smell, add water and for a more mist friendly spray for easy application. For your tile or wood floors and toilet Bleach again. It’s truly a miracle cleaner good for just about anything if you mix it with the right thing. Stains on the tiling of your kitchen floor or bathroom can be a hassle to treat and just as hard to scrub out, but a hearty mix of our handy miracle solution of bleach and a touch of Pine-sol makes the stains almost burn away in a blistering, gas-like way. Rapid rust remover Rust can be cleaned with enough effort, but why not take an easier route with an at-home solution you can pick up from your local Kwik Trip? This one may be a little harder to get going and calls for more ingredients, but the results don’t lie. Grab a Styrofoam cup, a bit of sand and some gasoline to make a one-of-a-kind metal cleaner to burn through rust on pots and pans. Start by crushing the Styrofoam into small chunks and add it to a pot. Turn your stove on to low and slowly add gasoline and stir. Once the chunks of Styrofoam start to dissolve into the mix, remove it from the heat and add sand slowly as you start mixing it again. Once you’ve created a nice paste, spread that on the stain you want off and add a little fire to it. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More I graduated from PETA University. Now I electroejaculate monkeys Catch me feds! I ballot stuffed 450 times in the 2024 election I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball drops series against Rutgers After winning the first game of the series, Wisconsin Badgers softball lost the next two away games against Rutgers. By Abby Shulman April 8, 2024 | 6:39pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team took on the Rutgers Scarlet Knights in New Jersey, ultimately dropping the series with two consecutive losses after a phenomenal 5-2 win on Friday. Wisconsin dominates in Friday victory Rutgers started off with the lead in the bottom of the first after various hits off starter Tessa Magnanimo followed by a scoreless second inning. During the top of the third, the Rutgers’ outfielders could only backpedal as catcher Hilary Blomberg smoked a three-run home run over the left field wall. The three Badgers finished their trip around the bases to demolish the Scarlet Knights’ lead and jump ahead 3-1. After centerfielder Peyton Bannon doubled in the fourth, she stole third following a wild pitch. She eventually plated home thanks to an RBI from infielder Alivia Bark. Blomberg, who has a team-leading batting average of .375, put on a power show, with her RBI in the fifth taking pinch runner Marytherese Nevin home for an insurance run. The Knights scored their second and final run in the bottom frame, which was ultimately a break for the Badgers considering the six total base runners throughout the bottom of the fifth and sixth. With no errors and only two Badgers striking out throughout the game, Wisconsin started the series off strong. Badgers tumble downhill after Friday’s victory The scoreboard looked quite different on Saturday as the Badgers were overpowered by the Knights 1-12. Rutgers took the wheel right away, scoring eleven runs in the first two innings. Wisconsin starting pitcher Shelby Jacobson struck the first two batters of the game out but failed to prevent the proceeding home run and grand slam. Without any better luck, Blomberg took over the mound in the second, surrendering three runs and a three-run homer. Infielder Fiona Girardot drove outfielder Brooke Kuffel in for Wisconsin’s only run of the game in the third, followed by one final run from Rutgers in the fourth. The game was called in the fifth inning due to the run rule. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Series win slips away Wisconsin lost the last game of the series Sunday in a less dramatic fashion than the previous game, with the final score tallying 4-1. Wisconsin immediately started off on the wrong foot, allowing Rutgers to take a 1-0 lead in the first after a triple and an RBI off starter Magnanimo. Rutgers pushed the score to 4-0 in the third after a back-to-back two-run shot and solo homer. The Badgers broke through in the fourth when infielder Skylar Sirdashney hit a dinger over the dead center field wall. However, the scoring ended after that despite multiple threats from the Knights, and Magnanimo — who struck out six in game three — got her team out of a bases-loaded puzzle with the help of Bark, who darted the ball to out a Scarlet Knight sliding home. Following the weekend series against Rutgers, Wisconsin sits at 13-22 on the season and 2-7 in the Big Ten. The Badgers will next face the Ohio State Buckeyes in a conference matchup at the Goodman Softball Complex from April 12-14. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Photo by Omar Waheed | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET Swiftie Super Bowl Sunday album announcement By Omar Waheed February 9, 2024 | 4:44pm CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Taylor’s team is in the Super Bowl this year, and we all should be rooting for the Chiefs. But the queen is once again planning to blow our minds with her masterful music. Swift is teasing us for the reveal of a lifetime after already blessing us with “The Tortured Poets Department” announcement, but she has one more surprise in store that only real Swifties will notice. Super Bowl LVIII? Super Bowl 58? It’s so obvious. She’s 34 and Kelce is 34. That equals 68. Take that minus LVIII. That equals 10. Now Kelce’s jersey number, 87, and his and Taylor’s birth year, 89, and subtract 89 minus 87. That equals two. Add 10 and two and you’ll get 12. You know what album came out in 2012? Red. The hex code for red is FF000. F is the fifth letter in the alphabet and there are five characters in the hex code. If you add those together, 12 and 5, you get 17. What age was Taylor Swift when she launched her debut, titular album? She was seventeen. Taylor Swift (Taylor’s Version) is coming out. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Wisconsin softball defeats DePaul 11-1 at Goodman Softball Diamond on April 11, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Wisconsin softball dominates in opening game at Goodman The Badgers took down in-state opponents in a convincing fashion at home. By Abby Shulman October 1, 2023 | 6:51pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers opened the 2023-24 season with a convincing 18-1 win over Bryant & Stratton College at Goodman Softball Complex. Catcher Emmy Wells set the stage for success against the Bryant & Stratton Bobcats with a home run in the first inning, bringing both Hilary Blomberg and Paige Miller home. The Badgers swarmed the field to congratulate their teammates. The Badgers ended the first inning leading 5-0 after Emily Bojan and Alivia Bark scored, with RBIs from Bojan and Skylar Sirdashney. Tessa Magnanimo pitched the first two innings, not allowing a single Bobcat on base in the bottom of the second. Similarly, Shelby Jacobson took over the mound and threw two perfect innings after her. She struck two batters out, and the fielders efficiently made the rest of the outs. Moving forward, the Badgers ended the fourth inning leading 6-0 after a single from infielder Fiona Girardot that brought Alivia Bark home after her triple. Pitcher Gabi Salo took over for the final three innings and made the bottom of the fifth incredibly quick, ensuring no Bobcat made it on base. On the offensive side, the Badgers ended the sixth inning up 12-0 thanks to Fiona Girardot’s home run that brought in Ava Kuszak and Kate Linkletter. Molly Schlosser, Rylie Crane and pinch runner Marytherese Nevin also scored, with RBIs from Schlosser and Blomberg. The game just kept getting better for the Badgers. Linkletter and Giradot hit home runs, making this Giradot’s second home run of the game, and Bark scored her third run of the game in the final inning. The score was a lopsided 18-0 by the middle of the inning. The game ended 18-1 after the Bobcats’ centerfielder scored a run late in the game. All in all, this was a dominant outing for the Badgers. The Badgers will look to continue their strong start when they host the University of Minnesota Duluth on Oct. 8 at Goodman Diamond. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Pro-Palestine protesters call for divestment outside of a Board of Regents meeting at Gordon Dining and Event Center at 8:00 a.m. on December 5, 2024. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says UWPD announced Tuesday the 19 protesters arrested for disrupting a Board of Regents meeting on Thursday will receive citations for deliberately creating a “volume of noise that unreasonably interfered” with the meeting. By Ella Hanley December 10, 2024 | 4:20pm CST The 19 pro-Palestine protesters arrested for disrupting a University of Wisconsin System Board of Regents meeting Thursday will receive citations for deliberately creating a “volume of noise that unreasonably interfered” with the meeting, UWPD announced Tuesday. One individual also received an additional citation for intentionally spitting on someone’s food in the meeting room. Around 50 pro-Palestine protesters disrupted a Board of Regents meeting at Gordon Dining & Event Center at 8:30 a.m. Thursday to demand UW-Madison financially and socially divest from Israel. Eight of those arrested were affiliated with UW-Madison, though it’s unclear if they were students or faculty. Two of those arrested were alumni, according to UWPD. Four of those arrested were affiliated with UW-Milwaukee, and five had no UW affiliation. UWPD detained the 19 protesters in Gordon Commons for a short period, prompting social media posts from UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) and other groups urging people to call UWPD and ask for the release of those detained. After the disruption, police officers prevented the public, journalists and even some UW officials from accessing the Board of Regents meeting, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. A UW-Madison police officer said the situation represented a “safety issue” and that they could watch the livestream. About 15 of those protesting were students from UW-Milwaukee, where a dozen UWM protesters held a one-minute disruption at a Board of Regents meeting last spring. Previously, the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standard launched an investigation into SJP on Dec. 6 for allegedly violating the university’s Expressive Activity Policy during the protest earlier that morning. University spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Dec. 7 that “UW supports the right to free expression within the bounds of the law and campus policy” and that the investigation and arrests were due to “disruptive behaviors” and violation of the Expressive Activity Policy. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo courtesy of Peter Kiessewalter. ARTS Kiesewalter and La Grange’s The Moth Project takes flight in Madison The Moth Project is an immersive show about moths that blends science, music and art into a hopeful allusion of the human experience. By Sonia Bendre November 7, 2024 | 4:00am CST It’s easy to think of the moth as the boring, less colorful relative of the butterfly. But The Moth Project explores the forgotten insect with new levels of music and videography. The Moth Project began on Oct. 24 at the Overture Center with a white background and two performers, Peter Kiesewalter, dressed in white with dark-shaded, white-rimmed sunglasses, and his partner Whitney La Grange. Kiesewalter expressed gratitude for being able to perform at the Overture Center and poked at the similarities between the Midwest and Ottawa, Canada, where The Moth Project was conceived — the abundance of natural beauty, the weather and even some of the same moth species. Then, the lights dimmed. Kiesewalter walked to the electric piano as La Grange got into position on the violin. The first song came to life on the screen with a visual of the spinning planet Earth: “Welcome to My Haus.” The title of the song hints at Kiesewalter’s German heritage and the tone of the show, which is equal parts playful and personal. Moths transitioned from nocturnal insect to lifestyle quickly for Kiesewalter when his brother, an interpretive naturalist, started collecting photographs of them during pandemic season in Canada. Kiesewatler proudly displayed his collection of moth photographs. Among his favorites is the luna moth, a green beauty with eyespots like half-moons on its wings, a type of moth that emerges from its cocoon with vestigial mouthparts and thus only days or hours to live. And what they do with that time, mostly, is have sex. The emergence and subsequent activities of the moth inspire two songs. The first is “Emergence,” a poppy, upbeat track with a motif reminiscent of “Flight of the Bumblebee” in the twenty-first century. Kiesewalter powered on the piano and vocals (hitting some impressive high notes), and La Grange played the difficult song on the violin with impressive consistency. The second song is “Pheromones,” a slow love song which starts with Kiesewalter crooning into a vocoder and features videos of intimate moth activities. Throughout the show, the lyrics continually surprised the audience. I especially enjoyed listening to “Death,” a mashup of KISS’s “Beth,” a Virginia Woolf essay about the death of a moth and Mozart’s “The Magic Flute.” Kiesewalter’s creativity came from an online thesaurus, painstaking hours of songwriting and science tips from his brother. Sometimes humorous and other times deeply personal, The Moth Project is fresh, experimental and most of all, fun. With the show, Kiesewalter aimed to raise viewers’ awareness about the natural world. It is a significant tonal shift from most media in the environmentalism movement, which tends to be negative. The Moth Project, on the other hand, celebrates the natural world. I left wanting to learn more about moths, and I had a more concrete idea of who I would be protecting by living sustainably. Kiesewater said botanist Robin Wall Kimmerer inspired parts of the show. Her voice is featured in the song “Reciprocity,” reading a chapter of her book “Braiding Sweetgrass” while La Grange plays a beautiful rendition of “Clair de Lune” by Claude Debussy. Like “Braiding Sweetgrass,” The Moth Project has a more positive and hopeful mood than a plain call-to-action. As Kimmerer tries to inject emotionality and a sense of being into her gardens, Kiesewalter tells not just the facts but the story of the moth, whether it is just emerging from a cocoon, traveling great distances or immolating itself on a flame, allowing people to see themselves in the creatures. During the show, as expected, Kiesewalter spent a lot of time talking about moths. But he also found a way to connect their journeys to the human condition. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email For example, the moth’s migration was framed as an allegory for Kiesewalter’s parents’ immigration from Germany to Canada in the 1950s. The song “Emergence,” Kiesewalter said, alludes to the experience of coming out. The show ended with a cover of Joni Mitchell’s “The Case of You” set to pictures of Kiesewalter’s family. From zydeco to classical to pop, the protean music reflected the diversity of moth species in the show’s videography. Peter Kiesewalter played an electric piano and sang, while La Grange, a Juilliard-trained violinist, played hauntingly beautiful melodies. Kiesewalter’s subject matter was similarly diverse, musing about moths’ motivations to kill themselves over flames in “Immolation,” the process of exiting the cocoon in “Emergence” and comparing their journeys to human migration in “Migration.” The song and videography of “Flight” was a standout — a series of high-res, slow-motion videos of moths jumping into the air with their wings fanning out behind them. If scientists are looking for a way to make people pay attention to nature again, The Moth Project is doing the right work. It is the antithesis of a dry list of facts or a compilation of depressing statistics. It is a performance with a human dimension, one full of excitement, contemplation and joy. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
The book is rich with imagery and metaphors so that readers can nearly smell the boiling stews and see the last morsel of food left politely on the serving platter by the dinner guests. Photo by Photo Courtesy of IndieWire | The Daily Cardinal ARTS ?‘Like Water for Chocolate’ is an invigorating read, addresses relevant themes of sexuality, feminism By Grace Wallner April 19, 2018 | 8:00am CDT Laura Esquivel’s “Like Water for Chocolate” is a magical, vivid and tragically romantic novel that tastes as satisfying as its delectable featured recipes. The novel is especially meaningful today, with major themes including female liberation and female sexuality. Female sexuality, in particular, has been an increasingly public issue, manifested by the MeToo Movement, women’s marches and other movements, in which women are reclaiming their bodies as their own rather than objects of male desire and demanding equality. “Like Water for Chocolate,” which was originally published in monthly installments, is separated into twelve sections, each beginning with a Mexican recipe that weaves into the narrative and connects to events in the main character, Tita’s, life. It takes place in Mexico at the turn of the century during a revolution, though it was published in 1989. Tita de la Garza, the novel’s protagonist, is born under fantastical circumstances. Her mother, Mama Elena, goes into labor on the kitchen table while the cook, Nacha, is chopping onions, and Tita pops out in a flood of tears, which later evaporates into piles of salt. This theme of extraordinary events that take place in everyday life is central to the novel. From the moment she is born, Tita is doomed to be a tragic heroine. Her mother does not care for Tita, who instead grows up in the kitchen cooking alongside the family cook and mother figure, Nacha and ranch maid Chencha. Citing family tradition, Mama Elena tells Tita that as the youngest daughter of the family, she must care for her mother until she dies. Because of the tradition, the cruel Mama Elena forbids her to marry the man who she falls for at first sight, Pedro. Pedro, who loves Tita equally, decides the only way he can stay close to Tita is to marry Tita’s sister, Rosaura. The tension and tragedy that ensues bubbles into a boiling disaster of love and lust. The title hints at the nature of the novel, as water used to make chocolate must be near the boiling point. This alludes to both the rage and sexual tension felt by Tita and other characters throughout the novel. The book is rich with imagery and metaphors so that readers can nearly smell the boiling stews and see the last morsel of food left politely on the serving platter by the dinner guests. The fable-esque sections end in cliffhangers that keep the reader wanting more. Esquivel delves expertly into the subjects of destiny, love, sexuality, food, family and feminism. Tita’s story represents the struggles of women trapped in domestic servitude. Tita constantly rebels against her mother’s cruelty, questioning the tradition and fighting against her predestined future. Tita uses her food as an outlet to convey her romantic and sexual feelings towards Pedro and undergoes a sort of sexual revolution throughout the book. In fact, the entire de la Garza household is female, as Mama Elena’s husband died at Tita’s birth. In this way, the novel serves as a feminist manifesto. However, what makes the novel so interesting is its constant, subtle inconsistency with feminist ideals. For the entirety of the book, Tita does not run away from home, in a way accepting her fate as her mother’s servant. Similarly, many of the other women in the book treat marriage as the only escape from servitude to their families, therefore entering into another type of servitude for their husbands. The entire novel is incredibly male-centric, although most events take place through a female gaze. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The novel, overall, would not pass the Bechdel Test, which is an evaluation that checks whether a work of fiction includes a scene in which two women have a conversation with each other about something other than a man. Tita essentially forms her life around Pedro and eventually makes an incredible sacrifice for love. This juxtaposition of a household and society built on female subjugation with a seemingly independent and sexually liberated female lead makes for a compelling read. Simultaneously a coming of age story and a romantic, magical fable, the novel has elements of value for any reader. “Like Water for Chocolate” is a rich, enticing page-turner with modern implications — you won’t want to put it down. I highly recommend you read it, even if you just want a break from tests and homework. It’s very short, so you’ll be able to finish it in a few days and it’s got to be more rewarding than that Chemistry exam review, right? Read it here, or for better formatting, check it out at the library! Grade: A Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
All the pieces in the exhibit are made out of materials like housing insulation, pieces of wood and metal and represent the struggles of housing insecurity. Photo by Photo Courtesy of The Chazen Museum of Art | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Chazen’s ‘Shelter: Crafting a Safe Home’ creates awareness, opens dialogue around housing insecurity By Michael Makowski November 15, 2018 | 12:00pm CST Millions of people around the world lack access to shelter and refuge. Each year in Madison, over 3,500 people experience homelessness, according to Porchlight, a local organization that strives to reduce homelessness in Dane County by providing shelter, affordable housing and supportive services. At the end of November, a new art exhibit displaying difficult truths of the subject will make its way to the Chazen Museum of Art. “Shelter: Crafting a Safe Home,” is organized by Contemporary Craft, a gallery in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Ann Sinfield, exhibition manager for the Chazen Museum of Art, decided to reach out to Contemporary Craft about hosting this particular exhibition. “[The Chazen] hasn’t really done anything like this,” Sinfield said. “We haven’t really engaged contemporary artists that work with a very specific topic.” “Shelter” is a socially engaged art experience. It uses different methods to create awareness and open dialogue around the pressing topic of housing insecurity through descriptive visuals. The exhibition incorporates different mediums to explain the issue. Sinfield explained the artists created tangible things, such as wearable jewelry and quilts, out of enigmatic and challenging concepts. Demitra Thomloudis is one featured artist in the exhibit. Her art looks at how gentrification affects local communities and neighborhoods. She uses construction debris from demolished homes to create wearable jewelry like brooches, earrings and necklaces. All the pieces are made out of materials like housing insulation, pieces of wood and metal. These remnants of demolished homes represent the struggles of housing insecurity. Charity White, another artist featured in the exhibit, is a figurative ceramicist and community activist. She crafts figures laying on benches split at the waist — the art is then actually put in parks, designed to prevent homeless people from sleeping on the benches. Her work seeks to expose the politics of urban design and invites the community to reconsider its use of participation in public space, according to her website. The imagery uncannily parallels the homeless individuals and population who often sleep outside the Chazen. “These artists are thinking about how to make artwork that ties bigger ideas into a personal experience,” Sinfield said. “It brings that data into a very direct relationship with an individual. It makes it physical; it makes it tangible.” The exhibit also hopes to host a sock and glove drive to collect donations for the local populations experiencing homelessness. On Nov. 29, there will be an opening event with representatives from local organizations helping those without shelter. “It presents these objects that are really interesting and really beautiful, but [that’s] not all they are,” Sinfield said. “There’s a lot of information that comes with them.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The exhibit is coming to Madison on Nov. 24 and will be displayed until Jan. 6, 2019. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
photo courtesy of Warner Bros. Pictures ARTS ‘Dune: Part Two’ is the sequel fans have been waiting for Denis Villeneuve’s second installment to the series is a sci-fi masterpiece. By Marit Erickson April 2, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Sometimes I think to myself: “Is Timothee Chalamet really talented, or do I just find him attractive?” Denis Villeneuve’s “Dune: Part Two” finally answered this question for me. “Dune: Part Two” is the sequel to 2021’s “Dune.” The plot follows Paul Atreides (Timothee Chalamet), a young aristocrat looking to bring power back to his decimated family. The long-awaited film stars Chalamet, Zendaya, Austin Butler, Florence Pugh and several other successful, big-name actors. Most of the “Dune” series takes place on the planet Arrakis, an arid wasteland home to the indigenous Fremen. The Fremen bring in Paul and his mother, Lady Jessica (Rebecca Ferguson), after the cataclysmic events that ended the former film. Fremen like Chani (Zendaya) teach Paul how to thrive on the dangerous desert planet. Paul struggles with haunting visions of the future as he works to bring down those who wronged him, primarily the evil House Harkonnen, which now dominates Arrakis. To preface, I have never read the original book series by Frank Herbert, and thus will not be basing my review on its faithfulness to the source material. I have to acknowledge Greig Fraser’s jaw-dropping cinematography. Watching this in IMAX was a religious experience. Every scene had a new gorgeous shot for me to marvel over. “Dune: Part Two” uses color in such an inventive way. My favorite example of this was the orange sand Fremen use in battle to obscure themselves from enemies. The thick orange haze looks stunning while also creating suspense in tense combat scenes. When Butler’s character Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen is introduced, the film goes completely black and white. We are treated to huge, bird’s-eye panning shots of a riotous stadium, packed with bald freaks thirsty for blood sport. The color shift perfectly intensifies the outlandish feeling of the Harkonnen clan. Making out-of-the-box choices like these makes me excited for where cinema is headed. The performances in “Dune: Part Two” were also phenomenal. Rebecca Ferguson immediately stands out — her portrayal of Lady Jessica was gripping throughout the nearly three-hour runtime. Most mother figures in these types of stories are either warm and nurturing or dead, but Lady Jessica is nothing of the sort. She is striking, intimidating, violent and powerful. It's so refreshing to see a female character like her in science fiction. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Chalamet is seriously great in this. My Oscar campaign starts now. Overacting is a big pet peeve of mine, and I never think he crosses that line. His performance is both subtle and moving. He can yell, but the scenes in which he is reserved and contemplative seem just as important. I also want to give a Dave Bautista shoutout. That man was just a WWE wrestler, and now he’s doing stuff like this. I locked in every time his character, Glossu Rabban, came on screen. There’s no way I could give credit to every performance in “Dune: Part Two” because the cast is so huge and talented. Zendaya is great. Butler was an evil freaky weirdo in the best way possible. I want to give Josh Brolin a big hug. Javier Bardem made me laugh on multiple occasions. And lest I forget Hans Zimmer’s score. Every time Loire Cotler belted out her battle cry, I got goosebumps. Her vocals are unreal. Zimmer’s score perfectly grounds viewers in the mood of the movie. It’s foreign yet familiar, old and futuristic — exactly like “Dune.” A friend of mine described “Dune: Part Two” as sci-fi “Game of Thrones,” which I think perfectly encapsulates why I loved it so much. It’s just epic. There’s no other way to describe something this long and intense as well as emotional, thrilling and rewarding. I feel like the first person to read The Odyssey or watch “Star Wars.” I see this series as a testament to human imagination. How wonderful is it that we can escape into a world so immersive and detailed? I still can’t believe this film exists. We are so blessed to be living in the age of CGI. Please go watch “Dune: Part Two” and marvel over how big those sandworms look. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo courtesy of Nine Sols via IGDB. ARTS Nine Sols: A sun-kissed descent into cyberpunk cat chaos Developed and published by Red Candle Games, Nine Sols is a masterpiece in both metroidvania design and Chinese mythological integration. By Arin Chandra October 17, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In a world full of metroidvanias — action games with non-linear progression — and platformer games struggling to compete with the likes of Hollow Knight and Dead Cells, Red Candle Games created a home run of a game that successfully integrates difficult gameplay with a phenomenal narrative and an art style based in Daoist mythology. Released on May 29, 2024, Nine Sols certainly competes with the all-time greats of the genre and is one of the best games to come out this year. A Daoist dystopia Looking from the outside in, Nine Sols is a story about the Solarians, a race of cat-like creatures, and their fall from grace. Protagonist Yi is betrayed by his mentor in a near-death encounter but survived thanks to the Primordial Roots, the Solarians’ main energy source. After living with the captured humans (hilariously called “Apemen”) on the New Kunlun colony ship, Yi finally gets the opportunity to return to the ship prior and exact his revenge on the Nine Sols, the tyrannical leaders who are responsible for betraying him. In contrast with the game’s futuristic elements and its ruthlessly brilliant artistic decisions, such as complex cargo belts and high-end research labs that only anthropomorphic cats can make, it shows the player that the Solarians were once pushing all sorts of boundaries in science and technology while also maintaining their roots. The futuristic setting isn’t the only thing going for Nine Sols, as it also features a robust backdrop shrouded in Daoist concepts. Many characters in the game bear striking resemblances to mythological Chinese figures. One of the most important ones is Shuanshuan, a human who is an indirect reference to the Yellow Emperor — a mythological ruler who allegedly shaped the key precepts of Daoism — including the quest for long life and a harmonious society. The evolving relationship between Yi and Shuanshuan shows how time can allow friendships to prosper. Given the game’s Daoist influence, their relationship can also be interpreted as a divine blessing to the Yellow Emperor from a “higher being” in the Solarian Yi. Another example of Daoism’s influence in Nine Sols is Yi himself. Meant to represent the mythological archer Hou Yi, he uses a bow and a sword throughout the game. However, his story differs from that of Hou Yi based on the player’s choices. Yi either succumbs to his goal of revenge or creates a new one of saving the imprisoned humans, either deviating from or adhering to Hou Yi’s fate. But both stories both share the concept of “shooting down” the Nine Sols, or the Nine Suns, and leaving one of them to guide the common people. The story is a wondrous blend of future and fiction that never fails to surprise. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “Cat souls” A game with an amazing story can still have bad gameplay to even it out to mediocrity. Luckily, Nine Sols doesn’t suffer from this problem. Yi starts off with some basic equipment — he can jump, dash and slash just like any other platformer character. But the real game changer in Nine Sols is the ability to deflect incoming attacks. All of this builds up Chi, which Yi can consume to hit an enemy with exploding talisman attacks for more damage. A combination of all of these basic elements already makes for an exceptionally nuanced gameplay experience. The best part about these abilities is that they are given to Yi when he needs them the most, allowing for many encounters to be the most challenging when you first see them. All of these mechanics are matched with well-designed enemies. Even the regular enemies the player encounters right at the beginning of the game can prove to be a big annoyance near the end. The boss battles serve as a worthy challenge for applying the skills the player has acquired throughout Yi’s journey. They start off decently enough but ramp up in quality quickly. The final boss is the ultimate test and feels like a flawless culmination of both skills and endurance, marking itself as one of the best in the entire genre. Combining intensity, power and culture, the soundtrack and audio design contribute to an addicting gameplay experience and further help to immerse the player in the world at hand. Nine Sols is an undeniably difficult game. Every death or setback is a learning opportunity. This is why many consider it a “Sekiro-like,” because of the uphill battle every encounter represents for the player. The most rewarding way to experience Nine Sols is to never give up. Pushing through the end of this experience has taught me a great deal about the potential of the metroidvania and platformer genres, and the best ones are always the ones that allow the players to keep pushing forward. Final thoughts Nine Sols weaves cyberpunk and mythological Chinese elements to create a unique world with many cultural aspects for players to discover, especially those tied to Daoist imagery and thematics. Its characters highlight a story of universal compassion and an allusion to the rise of mythological rulers in Eastern history with an art style to boot. And all of this is corroborated by a near-flawless gameplay system that encourages creativity and perseverance. Nine Sols is definitely one of the best metroidvanias ever made, and it is perhaps a true contender for Game of the Year. Overall Rating: 10/10 - Masterpiece Length: 12-24 hours Nine Sols is out now on Steam and all major consoles. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Bundling up in winter can make it a little more tolerable! Photo by Kalli Anderson | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE Surviving the Dark: How to adjust to the 4 p.m. sunsets of Daylight Savings By Adalyn Reichenberger November 7, 2024 | 3:00am CST Daylight Savings Time (DST) is used to increase productivity during the day, ensuring children are not going to school in the dark. The annual “fallback” offers an extra hour of morning light, but in exchange, we forfeit an hour of evening daylight. While DST has both positive and negative effects on individuals, I notice many communities, specifically college students, struggling more than others during this time. While the one-hour change may offer relief in the mornings, the dark, endless nights awaiting become an ongoing struggle. As a student, my days are packed with classes and activities, which tends to be the same for my peers. With this, the evenings are often when students can study, complete assignments and get ready for classes. As darkness creeps in around 4 p.m., motivation and productivity levels can be challenged, making these crucial studying hours a struggle. The early sunset can also negatively affect mental health, particularly for students prone to seasonal affective disorder (SAD). The lack of daylight exposure in the late afternoons and evenings can contribute to feelings of sadness, lethargy and difficulty concentrating. Madison’s long winters, coupled with shorter days, can exacerbate these symptoms. For students already juggling high academic and personal pressures, these seasonal challenges add a layer of stress. While DST likely won’t be changed in the near future, there are many ways students can be proactive in fighting the problems that come with it. As a long-time Wisconsinite and UW-Madison junior, I have been through this a few times before. Below, you will find my tips that have helped me persevere through the winter season. Adjust your sleep schedule While it may feel natural to stay up late as a student, shifting your sleep schedule can help make the most of available daylight. Even just an hour more of morning light can positively impact your mood and energy. Setting your alarm to take in a few extra hours of daylight as you get ready for the day can do wonders. This adjustment can help you feel more refreshed, energized and ready for class. Limit naps during the day With darker, colder afternoons, the temptation to nap can be strong. Trust me, I love a good afternoon bed-rotting time. However, excessive napping can interfere with a healthy sleep schedule, making you feel groggy or reducing the quality of your nighttime sleep. If you do feel the need to rest, try to limit naps to 20-30 minutes. This way, you can recharge without disrupting your night’s sleep. Take a moment in the morning I have found that taking some time to myself in the morning helps get my mind ready for the long, cold days. Reminding myself what I am grateful for and doing morning meditation allows me to get my mind and body prepared. If you are religious, mornings are a good time to catch up on any holy books and teachings for the day. Eat well, exercise and take care of yourself Finally, remember that maintaining a balanced diet, exercising regularly and practicing self-care are essential for overall wellness. This goes without saying, but by prioritizing health and well-being, students can combat the slow winter and stay productive all semester long. Doing what is best for you when these months get hard is important. It is time to get on that winter arc. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
President Joe Biden spoke to a crowd of hundreds Wednesday at a labor union training center. Photo by MK Denton | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS President Joe Biden shares ‘blue-collar blueprint’ for U.S. economy during Madison area visit Biden promised to rebuild America’s “hollowed out” middle class and bolster union job growth with infrastructure projects a day after delivering his State of the Union address. By Tyler Katzenberger February 8, 2023 | 7:07pm CST DEFOREST, Wis. — President Joe Biden praised labor unions and touted his economic agenda Wednesday in a speech to hundreds of workers at a labor training center near Madison. Biden’s appearance at the Laborers’ International Union of North America (LiUNA) in DeForest was his first public engagement since delivering his State of the Union address to a divided U.S. Congress Tuesday night, where he promised an economy built “from the bottom up and the middle out.” The president reiterated his “blue-collar blueprint” to rebuild U.S. infrastructure with union jobs and promised to repair a “hollowed out” middle class in a 25-minute speech Wednesday. “Wall Street did not build this country,” Biden said. “The middle class built the country, and unions built the middle class.” Gov. Tony Evers, Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway, U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan, University of Wisconsin-Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin and District 8 Ald. Juliana Bennett were in attendance as Biden touted Wisconsin infrastructure projects funded by legislation passed during his first two years in office. Those projects include replacing a pair of freeway bridges over the Wisconsin River in Columbia County, port facility upgrades in Racine and Green Bay, and 46 electric buses purchased for Madison’s forthcoming East-West bus rapid transit line, which broke ground in December, according to the Cap Times. “It’s all happening due to the president’s leadership and partnership,” Rhodes-Conway told the crowd before Biden spoke. MK Denton Biden also said he plans to stimulate U.S. manufacturing by introducing requirements for federal construction projects to use American-made materials. “My economic plan is about investing in people [and] places that have been forgotten,” Biden said. “Where is it written America can’t lead the world in manufacturing again?” He referenced an employment report released Friday by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) that found the U.S. added 517,000 jobs as the unemployment rate fell to 3.4%, the lowest measure since 1969. “The Biden economy is working,” the president said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin’s unemployment rate currently sits below the national average at 3.2% after the state added 60,000 jobs last year, according to the latest data from the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development. Madison’s unemployment rate is 1.6% — the lowest of any metro area in the nation, per BLS data. Despite the positive jobs report, Wisconsin faces an impending worker shortage. The state is estimated to lose 130,000 residents of prime working age by 2030 as young people leave for states with warmer climates and lower income taxes, leaving employers without enough employees to replace retiring baby boomers. Meghan Spirito President Joe Biden exits Air Force One shortly after landing at Dane County Regional Airport on Wednesday, February 8, 2023. Campus community members, politicians react Biden’s speech Wednesday earned largely positive remarks from several UW-Madison students in attendance. Freshman Whitman Bottari felt Biden’s focus on non-college career options demonstrated a “deep respect” for trade workers in unions. “College isn’t an option for so many Americans,” Bottari said. UW-Madison College Democrats Chair Maggie Keuler was glad Biden chose to visit Wisconsin first after the State of the Union. “It was a really impactful way to show how his policies have had a real impact here,” she said. Keuler said a standout moment from Wednesday was when Biden pulled out past comments against Social Security and Medicare from Republican lawmakers, including Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson. Biden accused some Republicans of wanting to let Social Security and Medicare “sunset” out of existence during Tuesday’s State of the Union, drawing boos from Republicans in Congress. “They sure didn’t like me calling them on it,” Biden recounted Wednesday. Biden shouted out Wisconsin manufacturers that received over $4 billion in federal funding since he took office, according to the White House, including California-based genetic medicine company Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals. Missy Hughes, Secretary and CEO of the Wisconsin Economic Development Corporation, said she was “delighted” to hear President Biden recognize Arrowhead’s $220 million expansion into Verona. Arrowhead estimates the project will create over 200 new jobs, according to the Verona Press. MK Denton Two members of the Laborers’ International Union of North America (LIUNA) look on as President Joe Biden delivers a speech to a crowd of hundreds at a labor training center in DeForest, Wisconsin on Feb. 8, 2023. In response to Biden’s visit, Republican state party leaders said Biden did “nothing to improve his standing with Wisconsin voters.” “Wisconsin’s households and businesses have faced crushing inflation, decreasing real wages and increasing energy bills for months,” WisGOP Chair Brian Schimming said in a statement Wednesday. “Trying to buy voters with his inflationary spending and Green New Deal agenda isn’t the answer to helping Wisconsin families.” U.S. inflation steadily cooled from 9.1% to 6.5% during the second half of 2022, according to recent BLS data. However, the nation’s annual inflation rate remains more than three times higher than Federal Reserve recommendations, and gas prices remain over a dollar higher than when Biden first took office, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Wisconsin Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) retweeted a Schimming statement calling Biden’s speech a “traveling economic medicine show” that ignored inflation. Schimming referenced an Associated Press poll released Monday that found just 37% of Democratic respondents wanted Biden to seek a second term. As @POTUS Biden brings his traveling economic medicine show here today, Wisconsinites know reality vs his rhetoric. Latest natl polling shows only 37% of D's want him to run again, he will lose Wisconsin. @wisgop ⁦@wisconsin_now⁩ pic.twitter.com/WMRSKLJQoW— Brian Schimming (@BrianSchimming) February 8, 2023 Biden delivers State of the Union to divided Congress Biden’s visit comes a day after he delivered the annual State of the Union speech to lawmakers in U.S. Congress, which focused heavily on affordability, police reform and foreign relations. Foreshadowing his speech in DeForest, Biden promised to promote labor union rights and domestic manufacturing with an economic agenda that would continue reviving “once-thriving cities and towns” in middle America. “Amid the economic upheaval of the past four decades, too many people have been left behind or treated like they’re invisible,” Biden said. “That’s why we’re building an economy where no one is left behind.” Hope Karnopp Security fences surround the U.S. Capitol ahead of the State of the Union address on Feb. 7, 2023. Amid privacy concerns over TikTok and other social media apps, Biden also asked Congress to pass legislation imposing stricter limits on personal data collected by tech companies. “We must finally hold social media companies accountable for the experiment they are running on our children for profit,” Biden said. Gov. Tony Evers banned TikTok from state devices last month, citing security and privacy concerns. The ban includes devices owned by the University of Wisconsin System. Other policies Biden introduced or supported yesterday include: Raising the debt ceiling Eliminating credit card “junk fees” Capping insulin at $35 for all Americans Banning non-compete agreements Investigating fraud of COVID-19 relief funds Banning assault weapons Codifying Roe v. Wade Passing the Equality Act Biden will travel to Tampa, Florida on Thursday to speak about his plans for Medicare, Social Security and lowering healthcare costs. News manager Hope Karnopp contributed to this report from Washington, D.C. Editor's note: This article was updated at 8:26 p.m. to accurately reflect attribution for a tweet from Brian Schimming. The tweet was previously attributed to Robin Vos. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tyler KatzenbergerTyler Katzenberger is the former managing editor at The Daily Cardinal. He also served as the state news editor, covering numerous protests, elections, healthcare, business and in-depth stories. He previously interned with The Capital Times, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and is an incoming POLITICO California intern. Follow him on Twitter at @TylerKatzen. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
CLEAN community executive Amanda Sadowski (left) and community team member Natalie Bouzas (right) urge students to sign an energy burden disclosure petition on Nov. 1, 2024. Photo by Lindsay Pfeiffer | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE UW-Madison student organization CLEAN urges students to sign energy burden petition Campus Leaders for Energy Action Now urge students to sign petition for a rental energy burden disclosure ordinance in Madison. By Lindsay Pfeiffer November 7, 2024 | 3:00am CST Campus Leaders for Energy Action Now (CLEAN), a student organization at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, stood at East Campus Mall Friday to urge students to sign their petition. The petition, which pushes for a rental energy burden disclosure ordinance for the city of Madison, needs at least 2,000 signatures, according to Amanda Sadowski, the community executive member of CLEAN and UW-Madison sophomore. CLEAN aims to ensure UW-Madison Chancellor Jennifer Moonkin sticks to the energy goals she outlined and pushes for additional clean energy projects across campus, Sadowski said. UW-Madison has currently set a goal to have net-zero emissions — when the amount of greenhouse gasses emitted is balanced by the amount removed from the atmosphere — by 2048 and an interim goal of 100% renewable electricity by 2030. A rental energy burden disclosure ordinance requires landlords to divulge information about their building’s energy efficiency to potential tenants, creating pressure for landlords to decrease energy costs for their renters. Energy burden is defined by the U.S. Department of Energy as the percentage of household income spent on energy costs. A household energy burden of 6% or more is considered high. Madison has an average energy burden of 2%, but low-income households can experience burdens up to 9%. Climate change is only exacerbating this issue. Flooding, wildfires and warmer temperatures can damage energy supply, which can disrupt energy transmission into homes. Additionally, a warmer climate means that more energy will be required to keep residents cool, especially in the summer. An increase in energy consumption increases carbon emissions and may create an influx of power loss across the country, which increases costs for Americans. Rental buildings use an average of 20% more energy per square foot than non-rentals. According to the 2022 American Community Survey from the U.S. Census Bureau, 52.5% of people living in Madison are renters. Older homes often have lower energy efficiency due to limited insulation and old appliances, which increases energy costs further. Sadowski told the Cardinal that when energy costs are transparent, prospective renters tend to choose more energy efficient housing. And when renters choose to live in energy efficient housing, greenhouse gas emissions are reduced. Buildings currently release 39% of the world’s carbon emissions, 28% due to the energy used to heat, cool and power them, according to the World Green Building Council. In Madison, buildings are responsible for 64.9% of the city’s total greenhouse gas emissions, with 45.1% coming from commercial buildings and 19.8% from residential buildings. Energy-related greenhouse gas emissions increased by 1.4% in 2017 to the equivalent of 32.5 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide. However, without energy efficiency, emissions would have increased by 12% in 2017. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email A rental energy burden disclosure in Madison would create transparency for renters regarding energy efficiency, which would result in decreased cost and reduced carbon emissions from rental buildings. By signing CLEAN’s petition, students can help advocate for clean energy projects on campus and in Madison. CLEAN is also involved in other clean energy projects on campus. The organization is working toward the addition of electric bikes and an electric lawnmower at the UW-Madison Arboretum and an electric car for University Housing, according to Hannah Stahmann, the campus and systems executive member of CLEAN and UW-Madison senior. The city of Madison is also taking steps to make buildings more energy efficient with programs such as Project Home, which aids in the weatherization of homes on behalf of the state of Wisconsin. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin The Department of Education forms the foundation of Wisconsin’s education system. Trump shouldn’t dismantle it. By Maya Morvis December 5, 2024 | 4:00am CST President-elect Donald Trump’s call to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education may sound like a bold move toward decentralizing control and restoring local power. But for Wisconsin’s public schools, it’s a risky proposition that could destabilize the very foundation of our education system. The Department of Education plays a crucial role in ensuring equitable access to resources for K-12 schools and higher education institutions. Without it, Wisconsin could face significant challenges that would further deepen the divide between wealthy and underfunded districts, particularly in rural areas. Federal funds, including Title I aid for low-income schools and special education funding, are critical to Wisconsin’s educational system. These programs help ensure that schools with the most need are able to offer a fair and equal education for all students. If Trump’s plan to eliminate the department comes to fruition, this funding could be at risk, forcing local districts to pick up the slack. In a state where education funding is already a hot-button issue, this would likely lead to budget cuts, teacher layoffs or tax increases to cover the loss. Low-income students, students of color and those in rural areas would be hit hardest, losing access to programs and support that help level the playing field. Moreover, eliminating the department would create a patchwork of state and local education policies, potentially leading to a fragmented educational experience for Wisconsin’s students. National standards on testing, teacher qualifications and school safety regulations would vanish, leaving each state to determine its own rules. This could create a situation where students in Wisconsin’s wealthier districts continue to receive high-quality education, while those in underfunded areas are left behind. Inconsistent policies would also make it harder for families to navigate the educational system and ensure that their children are receiving a fair education. The impact on higher education would also be felt across the state. Many Wisconsin students rely on federal student aid, including Pell Grants and student loans, to attend college. If the Department of Education is dismantled, tuition rates could skyrocket, and colleges may become less accessible for low-income students. Furthermore, the department enforces Title IX protections for students against discrimination, ensuring that all students, regardless of gender, are treated equally. Without this protection, Wisconsin’s colleges and universities could face increased legal challenges and potential violations of students’ rights. Proponents of the plan argue that eliminating the Department of Education would give states and local communities more control over their educational systems. They claim that federal oversight stifles innovation and imposes a one-size-fits-all approach that doesn’t work for every state. Advocates for local control, including Trump’s supporters, believe communities have a better understanding of their needs. They also argue that federal overreach has led to the politicization of education, with national mandates like Common Core stifling local decision-making. While this argument holds some merit, it ignores the larger issues of equity that exist within Wisconsin’s education system. The federal government’s involvement ensures that low-income districts and rural areas have access to the same resources as wealthier, more urban areas. Local control can work well for some districts, but it can also widen the gap for those that need support the most. Rather than eliminating the Department of Education, a better approach would be to reform it, making it more responsive to the needs of local communities while still ensuring that equity and accessibility remain at the forefront of educational policy. Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin’s students and educators. The risks of cutting off federal funding, creating fragmented policies and undermining higher education outweigh the potential benefits of local control. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If we truly want to ensure that every student in Wisconsin has access to a high-quality education, we must look at ways to strengthen, not dismantle, the institutions that support it. Our students deserve better than the uncertainty that would come from eliminating the very agency that guarantees their right to an equitable education. Maya Morvis is a sophomore studying journalism and political science. Do you agree that the Department of Education is necessary for Wisconsin schools? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
A deer through binoculars. Photo by Nicole Steele | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE The unknown side of hunting: Traditions, overpopulation and conservation What to know about hunting before the whitetail season starts Sept. 14. By Nicole Steele September 13, 2024 | 2:00am CDT It’s that time of year again: the leaves are starting to change color, the days are getting shorter and the temperature is slowly decreasing. Thousands of hunters will be walking the woods on Sept. 14, in search of the elusive whitetail deer, hoping to catch a glimpse of a buck to hang on their walls. Scott Katzenberger, an avid hunter who’s been hunting for more than 40 years in northern Wisconsin, said he still enjoys getting the chance to be out in nature and deepen relationships. “I’ve been able to bond with my high school friends. I think about all the moments that I bonded with my dad and my family. I got to take my son deer hunting for 3 years. I just got married, and now I hunt with my new wife and she loves to go, and it’s a big part of our life,” he told The Daily Cardinal. But there is more to the story of hunting than meets the eye. Hunting is less of a survival use and more of a recreational pastime, according to PETA. The animals suffer in pain during the process of being shot, with the risk of being wounded and suffering even more, the organization argued. Still, Katzenberger said hunters never try to cause harm to wildlife or the land that they hunt on. “I think most hunters have more respect for wildlife and nature than most people realize,” Katzenberger said. “Everything that we hunt and take as game goes across our table as food, [and] everything that we take we have a legal license in order to consume.” Hunting accidents, such as destroying property or unintentionally killing an animal or human, occur frequently each year. Out of around 18 million hunting participants, 4,700 of those were involved in an accident in 2018, according to the National Shooting Sports Foundation. Since the introduction of hunter’s safety courses in Wisconsin in 1967, all hunters in Wisconsin born after 1973 are required to receive a hunter’s safety certification. As a result, incidents have decreased by 96%. The Wisconsin deer population is at an all-time high, according to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Mandatory registration of each deer harvested helps track population trends, and other factors such as weather, the length of the hunting season and the amount of hunters that register affect the population statistics. Katzenberger said that hunting is a great way to reduce overpopulation. “When any animal gets overpopulated, there’s more disease amongst the herd. There’s a lot of evidence [that hunting] keeps the deer herd in check but healthy. And when I say healthy I mean it’s not so overrun that they’re decimating the population of a lot of other game,” he said. Every three years, the DNR releases a map of Wisconsin showing counties with high, maintained and low population density of deer. This can help hunters determine the best counties to hunt in to reduce overpopulation, the counties to not hunt in to increase population and the counties to hunt in to help maintain population. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Overpopulation also has the possibility of increasing traffic accidents. Between 15,000 and 19,000 deer crashes occur annually on Wisconsin roadways, according to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. “[When] your deer population is way out of control, you’re gonna have way more accidents on the highway, and deer hits raise insurance prices,” Katzenberger said. And due to overpopulation across the state, chronic wasting disease (CWD) is becoming more prevalent each year. “Chronic wasting disease is a fatal, infectious nervous system disease of deer, moose, elk and reindeer/caribou. It belongs to the family of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) or prion diseases. CWD occurs only in members of the cervid or deer family — both wild and captive,” Christina Kizewski, a wildlife biologist for the Wisconsin DNR, told The Daily Cardinal. Kizweski said there are some practices hunters can follow in order to slow and control the spread of CWD, including testing deer for CWD by removing the lymph nodes in the neck. The DNR and partner supporters also have many deer carcass dumpsters across the state. Managed hunting plays a large role in the DNR’s conservation and land management efforts, Kizweski said. “It helps keep populations in check and keep a balance on the landscape,” she said. “Without hunting, species populations can grow to unhealthy levels where disease outbreaks can occur more readily and could impact human health and safety.” For people who don’t hunt but would like to support conservation, just purchasing a license can help, Kizweski said. “Hunting license fees are used for habitat management for species, and monitoring and research objectives as well. Even if folks are not interested in harvesting an animal, the purchase of a hunting license contributes financially to landscape level work, which supports wildlife in multiple facets,” said Kizweski. Hunting is more than just the importance of conservation, the reduction in overpopulation or the reduction of diseases, according to Katzenberger. It’s a tradition, an endless part of many families lives that many hope to pass onto future generations. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Badgers don’t bother trying against Minnesota, fail to become bowl-eligible No, it wasn’t a dragon. The Wisconsin Badgers’ football team was slayed by a squad of Minnesota Golden Gophers. By Tomer Ronen December 2, 2024 | 12:15pm CST The honey badger is known for its tendency to play dead when wounded. On Friday, the Wisconsin Badgers (5-7) let themselves be killed off by the Minnesota Golden Gophers (7-5). It was a fitting end to a miserable second season for Luke Fickell — who fell to 12-13 as Wisconsin’s head coach after the 24-7 home loss — lifeless, uninteresting, cold and limp. The Badgers put up no fight in attempting to keep their 22-year bowl streak, the third-longest (now no longer) active in the country, alive against their border rivals, finishing the season with an empty cabinet for the first time since the team added a third trophy game in 2014 in what was a game full of “firsts.” The first five-game losing streak since 1991. The first Badgers team to lose Paul Bunyan’s Axe three of four times to Minnesota since 1990. And, somehow, the first and only start for quarterback Braedyn Locke without an interception this season. Don’t worry, Locke didn’t look any better than usual. The coldest game at Camp Randall since 1964 started off slow, with one first down between the two teams in four drives. A 37-yard strike from Gophers quarterback Max Brosmer to wide receiver Daniel Jackson warmed Minnesota up, propelling them into Badgers territory. A Brosmer touchdown run near the end of the first quarter gave them a lead they never relinquished. It seemed as though the Badgers were ready to roll over and let the season come to an end. Jackson consistently beat star cornerback Ricardo Hallman, and running back Darius Taylor gashed the once-fearsome Badger front-seven for 143 yards. Later in the second quarter, a 40-yard Marcus Major run off a fake tush push put the Gophers in scoring position. Even after Brosmer connected with Jackson in the end zone to give the Gophers a 14-0 lead, the Badgers had a chance late in the first half. Receiving the ball first to start the second half gave Wisconsin an opportunity to go two-for-one — scoring twice before Minnesota touched the ball again — and tie the game up. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Instead they punted on their next three drives. Wisconsin struggled to move the ball throughout the game, totaling an uninspired 167 yards on the day. Their biggest play was an 18-yard scamper by running back Tawee Walker, but it didn’t come until the start of the fourth quarter. The run gave the Badgers a breath of fresh air and a chance to cut the Gophers’ lead down to seven, but a third-and-7 holding penalty and incomplete pass put the Badgers in full give-up mode. With just over 12 minutes to go, down 14, a bowl on the line and a team that could barely scratch its way into enemy territory, Fickell decided to attempt a field goal rather than trying to keep the season alive. Naturally, kicker Nathaniel Vakos, a 66.7% field goal kicker from 30-39 yards coming into the game, missed from 37-yards out. Perhaps he just wanted in on the air of failure surrounding the team Friday. Just two drives later, Wisconsin’s season ended on a fourth-and-1 run from the shotgun. How fitting. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80
Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations Aaron Vieth will investigate Students For Justice in Palestine for allegedly violating Expressive Activity policy during their Dec. 5 protest on behalf of the Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards. By Sreejita Patra December 6, 2024 | 12:38am CST The Office of Student Conduct and Community Standards (OSCCS) launched an investigation Thursday into University of Wisconsin-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) for allegedly violating the university’s Expressive Activity Policy during their protest at a Board of Regents meeting earlier that morning. A source familiar with SJP shared documents with The Daily Cardinal that said the organization may have violated the rules in the RSO Code of Conduct through the “use of university facilities and grounds,” “obstruct[ing] orderly conduct” and “fail[ing] to comply” with administration when around 50 protesters disrupted the Board of Regents meeting Thursday morning demanding the university financially and socially divest from Israel. Investigating Officer Aaron Vieth said in the documents the organization will face “further sanctions up to and including termination of RSO status” if he recommends them to be guilty of violations in probation requirements in effect since October and RSO Code of Conduct policy. Assistant Dean of Students and OSCCS Director Tonya Schmidt previously said in September that under normal circumstances she would recommend SJP be suspended as an RSO, but because campus administration and SJP struck a May agreement to end the pro-Palestine encampment, the university considered this a “mitigating factor” and approved a 10-month probation instead of suspension on Oct. 3, 2024. SJP is responsible for scheduling an investigatory interview by 4:30 p.m. on Dec. 15, 2024 and will have seven calendar days after Vieth’s recommendation to request a hearing for the case. If no hearing is requested by this deadline, Vieth’s recommendation will become the university’s final decision. Vieth said external judicial bodies may also investigate SJP or its members about the protest, and if the organization disbands during the disciplinary process, it may be added to the “Student Organizations Not in Good Standing” letter. “If this happens and Students for Justice in Palestine would like to become registered as a student organization again in the future, the organization will have to petition for reinstatement no matter what the outcome of the disciplinary process is,” Vieth said in the documents. University spokesperson John Lucas told the Cardinal Friday that “UW supports the right to free expression within the bounds of the law and campus policy” and that the investigation and arrests were due to “disruptive behaviors” and violation of the Expressive Activity Policy. SJP spokesperson Dahlia Saba defended the protest and told the Cardinal Thursday that university police “brutally assaulted protesters and arrested 19 people seemingly at random.” WKOW-27 reported Thursday that protesters said police “forcibly slammed” a protester against a wall while following instructions to walk away. “SJP protested the business and finance meeting of the Board of Regents to demand that they disclose their investments and, in accordance with Wisconsin law, divest from companies complicit in Israeli apartheid,” Saba said. “Now, the university is again putting SJP through a disciplinary process to punish us for calling out the university’s unethical and illegal investment practices.” Wrists of protesters bleed due to tight zip ties used when they were arrested for breaking UW-Madison protest policy at the Board of Regents meeting at Gordon on Dec. 5, 2024. Courtesy of UW-Madison Students for Justice in Palestine/Instagram Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email SJP posted photos Friday of protesters’ wrists bleeding due to restraints after their arrests. UWPD spokesperson Marc Lovicott told the Cardinal Friday the police did not assault protesters and instead restrained them with handcuffs or “disposable flex-cuffs” which are similar to large zip ties. He said an officer accidentally “nicked the wrist” of a student while releasing them, but UWPD staff treated the injury. “This is a common tactic with this type of group we saw in May as well, where these just ridiculous, false claims are made,” Lovicott said. “I think the videos on social media speak for themselves as to how we tried to get protesters to clear the room so the meeting could legally go on as was needed.” UW-Milwaukee student and co-chair of Students for a Democratic Society Audari Tamayo was among the 19 people arrested earlier today. He called the investigation “bogus” and said UW-Madison’s Expressive Activity Policy, which puts restrictions on “expressive activity” within 25 feet of university buildings, essentially criminalizes protest on campus. “Across the country, SJP chapters are getting banned and investigated for standing up, fighting back and not taking no for an answer,” Tamayo told the Cardinal Thursday. “When all is said and done, the universities and anybody who restricted the ability of the community to protest are going to be on the wrong side of history. It’s not going to make us stop.” UW-Madison community and environmental sociology professor Samer Alatout, faculty advisor for SJP, said the university is “absolutely disgraceful” for “mak[ing] the issue about student disruption while a genocide is raging on in Gaza.” He said Palestinians are being “asked to disappear *poof* silently and without a whimper.” “Students are requesting for transparency of investment decisions, for UW Foundation to follow state’s laws which reject profiting from investments in companies that condone “discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, and sex,” Alatout said. “Genocide, as a matter of fact, violates all those provisions.” This story was updated at 1:36 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 6, 2024 to include Lucas' statement, corrections on RSO policy and additional claims from protesters surrounding UWPD conduct. This story was updated at 3:00 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 6 to include Lovicott’s statement and response to protesters' claims. College Editor Mary Bosch contributed reporting to this story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Sreejita PatraSreejita Patra is a senior staff writer and the former summer ad sales manager for The Daily Cardinal. She has written for breaking news, campus news and arts and has done extensive reporting on the 2024 presidential race. She also covered the Oregon Village Board for the Oregon Observer. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks 19 arrested after pro-Palestine protesters interrupt Board of Regents meeting
Photo by Jonathan Mintz | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup The Wisconsin men’s basketball team was plagued by turnovers and couldn’t contain Marquette star Kam Jones. By Jacob Szczap December 11, 2024 | 10:17am CST The No. 11 Wisconsin Badgers men’s basketball team entered Fiserv Forum on Saturday with the goal of keeping their three-game winning streak over their in-state rival, the No. 5 Marquette Golden Eagles. But they were unable to contain Marquette star Kam Jones and his pesky cast of supporting scorers. The Badgers head back to Madison having relinquished their in-state bragging rights, falling 88-74 in front of a packed arena. Wisconsin, now 8-2 (0-1 Big Ten), stayed afloat in a back-and-forth first half but couldn’t right the ship after receiving a second-half sucker punch from the country’s fifth-ranked team. In Marquette’s second-half domination, the Shaka Smart-led Golden Eagles left little room for doubt in determining the state’s best team, for now. On an afternoon in which Wisconsin had to play smart, sound basketball, the Badgers uncharacteristically turned the ball over 16 times. Marquette’s intense defense put pressure on Wisconsin, consistently turning Badger miscues into Golden Eagle points. Jones gave Wisconsin’s defense the most trouble, casually collecting 32 points in a variety of facets. The 6-foot-4 senior shot 12-21 from the field and 3-7 from three, getting to the lane, floating mid-range runners and hitting threes. Jones did this all while finding open teammates, good enough for six assists. “He’s strong, he’s physical, he’s mature,” Wisconsin head coach Greg Gard said about Jones after the game. “But I think the biggest thing is just what’s between his ears, the mental part of it, that he lets the game come to him and doesn’t try and force it.” Smart, Marquette’s head coach, offered a much more blunt synopsis of his star. “In my opinion, he’s the best guard in the country,” he said. Along with Jones’ outburst, Marquette received 13 points from senior forward David Joplin and 12 apiece from guards Stevie Mitchell and Chase Ross, while forward Ben Gold added nine. Meanwhile, Wisconsin guard Max Klesmit led the Badgers in scoring, contributing 22 points. Klesmit found confidence early, hitting two threes in the game's opening minutes before finishing 6-11 from beyond the arc and 6-12 overall. After a quiet first half, guard John Blackwell finished with 17 points on 7-11 shooting, with three rebounds and three assists. The other guard, John Tonje, added 14 points on 3-11 shooting, while grabbing six rebounds. In a first half where neither team pulled away, Tonje led Wisconsin with 12 points followed by Klesmit, who scored 11. Facing a tough Marquette defense, Tonje used his knack to get to the free-throw line and drove fiercely at Golden Eagle defenders to draw fouls. Seven of his first-half points came at the line. In the midst of a first-half chess match, the Badgers also received a boost from forward Carter Gilmore, who scored three points, grabbed six rebounds and dished out a career-high four assists. In a scrappy game, Gilmore provided the spark needed to duel with Marquette. Wisconsin led 39-37 at halftime, but in the second half, the Badgers couldn’t keep the air in the tires that kept them moving in the first half. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email After Tonje picked up his third foul and was forced out of the game with 17:23 left, Marquette took immediate advantage of Wisconsin playing without its primary points generator, putting the Badgers on their heels and flipping the game. The Golden Eagles went on a quick 7-2 run, turning up the pressure, forcing Gard to call a timeout. Suddenly, Marquette’s home crowd came fully alive. Next, as Marquette took all momentum, Wisconsin was faced with the challenges of containing a heating-up Golden Eagle offense and scoring against their suffocating, high-energy defense. In return, they turned over the ball seven times in 14 possessions, putting the game squarely in control of Marquette. The turnovers, Gard said, “created an avalanche of us getting in transition defensively.” “They took advantage of that, were able to get to the rim, and then got confidence going from that,” Gard said. “And then we were playing on our heels for the rest of the second half after that.” Over this stretch, the game shifted from a 45-44 Wisconsin advantage to a 61-53 Marquette lead. From there, the Marquette onslaught continued, and even as Wisconsin stayed within striking distance, a Badgers comeback never seemed realistic. After a trying week, Wisconsin is now the loser of two games in a row. In the midst of enduring the up-and-down nature of a college basketball season, the Badgers will get right back on the horse with a conference showdown at Illinois on Tuesday. “After this week, the ending message is we don’t have time to feel sorry for ourselves,” Gard said. “We gotta get better and turn around and play in two days again in Illinois.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center
Courtesy of jv394587/Flickr ARTS Wes Anderson’s newest movie ‘Asteroid City’ shoots for the stars and hits By Paige Stevenson July 18, 2023 | 2:00am CDT Eclectic writer and director Wes Anderson added science fiction and western to the vast list of genres he mastered with his newest film “Asteroid City” when it released on June 22. Filled with Anderson’s unique style, humor and ability to stack a cast, “Asteroid City” is rich in emotion, relatability and even a bit of existentialism. As a longtime fan of Anderson’s movies, I eagerly awaited this newest addition to his collection. His films are extraordinary for plot and substance but especially their vivid colors, use of symmetry and overall cohesive style, which make each of his films instantly recognizable as a “Wes Anderson movie.” But Anderson’s movies aren’t always for everyone. If you’re not used to his quick, flat sense of humor or odd storylines, you might leave the theater feeling confused and lost within his pieces. “Asteroid City,” while beautiful, was a movie that made even me go back and think about certain parts. Loosely, “Asteroid City” follows a family of four and their arrival in the titular Asteroid City for a junior science convention set in the American desert of the 1950s. While there, they explore their relationships both with themselves, other junior science lovers and even aliens. I was reminded of the humor and antics of “Royal Tenenbaums” and “Fantastic Mr. Fox” while watching the film due to the film’s clever one-liners and focus on family issues. But I found more similarities in terms of cinematography with “The Grand Budapest Hotel” and “The French Dispatch.” Maybe it was the color scheme or overall filming, but “Asteroid City” had the two-dimensional feel and vibrancy of “The Grand Budapest Hotel” while also exploring the emotional depth and storytelling capacities of film noir. Such a technique illuminated certain ideas to audience members, while hiding the very same details from characters. This trait mimicked cinematography found in “The French Dispatch,” but I felt it worked better in Anderson’s most recent movie because it acted as a narrator who fit in with the overarching plot rather than being a standout scene or idea. Narrators are common in Anderson’s movies, but “Asteroid City” was unique in that its narrator had a subplot that stood on its own and added insight into the decisions and actions of the main characters. Other Anderson movies like “The French Dispatch” tried a similar idea but without the depth found in “Asteroid City.” However, this switching from black-and-white to color, or subplot to the main plot, was slightly confusing at times. Even when the grayscale scenes spoke about the main plot, it felt like an entirely different story and struggled to fit cohesively with the colored scenes. While this may have been intentional — and surely felt that way toward the end of the film — it was a little difficult to get used to. I thought this change in color grading worked particularly well in scenes that involved more introspective examinations of the movie. Lines delivered by these characters seemed to look inward into Anderson himself or the fears of the audience. Without giving too much away, these scenes offered a reassuring voice to sooth the feelings of doubt that often accompany mold-breaking actions and creative endeavors. The line “your pictures always play,” said by Jason Schwartzman’s character, stood out to me as a self-reference by Anderson. Even though his movies get produced and do well at the box office, the line hints he may have some doubt for their success as he constantly challenges the conventions of modern filmmaking. Aside from its examination of the self and self-doubt, “Asteroid City” also speaks to greater issues of acceptance and empathy, especially in a time where so many lose out on respect due to race, sexual orientation or gender and many other reasons. While Asteroid City’s characters may have been talking about an alien, their acceptance and empathy for a creature unknown to them could inspire audience members to do the same in the future. Subtle calls to areas where people may not feel respected was a nice touch, including many references to queer relationships and immigrants. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Like other Anderson films, the acting in “Asteroid City” is nothing short of well done, and it was fun to pick out recurring actors like Tilda Swinton, Adrien Brody and Schwartzman, who’s been in almost every Anderson film to date. There are also new faces, most notably Tom Hanks, Scarlet Johansson and Maya Hawke. Hanks’ character mimicked many of the roles played by Bill Murray in other Anderson films as he took the persona of an aloof father-in-law more worried about himself than others. Additionally, Steve Carrell made an appearance, bringing the signature sense of humor he’s best known for without feeling out of place in an Anderson movie. Overall, I thoroughly loved Anderson’s newest movie, “Asteroid City” for its pastel vision of the wild west, its subject matter and relatability while also feeling otherworldly. His films are truly works of art appreciated for their creativity and style, even by those who don’t always seek out his movies. Bold but playful, “Asteroid City” showcased Anderson’s creativity as a director and writer. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Online political discourse isn’t democratic. We have the chance to change that As political dialogue shifts online, we are losing the empathy and connection needed for true democratic engagement. By Lillie Sunby October 25, 2024 | 2:00am CDT As students of a major university in a critical swing state, it is important that we engage in a political dialogue. But as our conversations shift more and more to online spaces, we need to be aware of how this change affects our political engagement as students. So far, it hasn’t been a change for the better. Nowadays, many of our conversations happen over screens. Political conversations in particular have moved online, especially on platforms like X, Instagram and Facebook. The convenience of these platforms has led us to substitute face-to-face interaction with virtual conversation. Although digital spaces give us quick access to news and political updates, they also make it easier to engage in harmful behaviors, such as name-calling or spreading misinformation. This problematic byproduct has become especially clear in the most recent elections. Rather than thoughtful discussions about policy, we see candidates trading insults. And rather than hearing out the other side, we see supporters engaging in toxic online behavior. Contrast this with in-person political debates, which allow for more meaningful conversations where individuals face each other and create an environment of respect. Online, the distance makes it too easy to dehumanize your opponent. A recent study revealed that more than one third of social media users are worn out by political discussions online, and almost 60% find these conversations stressful and frustrating. But despite the clear drawbacks of online conversation, we continue to rely on it. Why? Because it’s just more convenient. It’s far easier to engage in a political debate with someone from behind a screen than to face them in person. Ultimately, internet political discourse is here to stay. Fortunately, the internet is not the root of the issue. It isn’t the platform we use, but rather the way we choose to interact with the platform that has been failing us. While technology has impacted the way we engage politically, we have ourselves to blame for the quality of our conversations. But we also have the power to change it. If the internet is now a permanent part of political discourse, we need to adapt. Rather than allow technology to strip our conversations of humanity, we need to find ways to bring empathy and understanding back into the equation. This means listening actively, being open-minded and avoiding the quick judgment that we now rely on in online spaces. You might think that this all sounds cliche, or that you’ve heard it all before. Frankly, I’m sure that you have. But the next time you engage in a political discussion, whether it's online or in person, it’s time to actually keep the advice in mind. Our words impact the future of our democracy, so choose them carefully. We can’t get rid of technology. The best we can do is enter every conversation with an open mind and a willingness to listen to each other. Lillie Sunby is a sophomore studying psychology, communications and political science. Do you agree that online political debate is undemocratic? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo by Jonathan Mintz | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center The defeat marks the first loss of the No. 11 Wisconsin men’s basketball team’s season. By Jacob Szczap December 7, 2024 | 10:01am CST The No. 11 Wisconsin men’s basketball team couldn’t keep their spark alive Tuesday night to beat the Michigan Wolverine in a hard battle, falling 67-64. The game featured two teams with pairs of seven-footers, and down the stretch, Michigan’s duo of giants emerged victorious. During a back-and-forth second half that featured nine lead changes, the Badgers ultimately couldn’t contain Michigan’s partnership of forward Danny Wolf and center Vladislav Goldin. The loss marks the first for Wisconsin, now 8-1 (0-1 Big Ten). The Wolverines improved to 7-1 (1-0 Big Ten). Wolf and Goldin accounted for 44 of the Wolverines’ 67 points, paving the way to a victory and frustrating Wisconsin head coach Greg Gard and an arena full of Badgers fans. With one Wisconsin seven-footer, forward Steven Crowl, caught up in foul trouble and eventually fouling out with just over three minutes left in the game, the duo’s constant attacking with ball screens was too much for the other forward Nolan Winter and the Badgers defense to handle. Over the game’s final two minutes and 23 seconds, Goldin scored the final six points, finishing with a game-high 24. "We just weren't physical enough, weren't intent on the ball screen with what we were doing,” Winter said after the game. “It's on both of us as bigs, and we know that. We've already talked, and we know we have to be better, and Steve [Crowl] knows he has to stay out of foul trouble because we need him and the presence that he brings us.” Meanwhile, Wisconsin’s offense crumpled as Goldin hit big shots down the stretch. While trailing late in the game, the Badgers got decent looks from guard Max Klesmit on three separate possessions, but the senior failed to cash in on each attempt, capping off a tough evening offensively. Klesmit shot 3-14 from the field, including 1-9 from three, and finished with eight points. “Max has made those shots before,” Gard said after the game. “He’s in a slump right now, we’re gonna help him get out of it.” On a testy night offensively, the guard play of John Tonje and John Blackwell led Wisconsin. Tonje finished with 18 points on 5-12 shooting, three rebounds and three assists while Blackwell scored 16 points on 6-12 shooting and accumulated a team-high nine rebounds. Winter, Klesmit and guard Kamari McGee added eight points each. The Badgers shot 22-64 from the field and a mere 6-27 from three. In the first half, Wisconsin received a well-distributed scoring performance from Winter, Tonje, Klesmit and Blackwell, each scoring six points en route to a 32-26 halftime lead. Even as Tonje’s first-half minutes were limited due to foul trouble, Wisconsin’s offense looked formidable without their leader. After Tonje subbed out of the game with 6:26 remaining in the half, the Badgers rattled off an impressive 10-0 run, capped off by a pair of assisted dunks from Winter that put them ahead 29-20. At that point, the Badgers had done a decent job containing Wolf and Goldin and had played mostly well-connected, in-sync defense. While Wolf and Goldin accounted for 16 of the Wolverines’ 26 first-half points, the Badgers did a phenomenal job locking down the perimeter. Michigan shot only 7-33 from the field and 2-16 from three in the first half, finishing the half on a 7:42 field goal drought with 11 straight misses. But in the second half, Michigan’s offense began to pick up, relying more on Goldin and Wolf, giving Wisconsin’s defense plenty of issues. In the half’s first five minutes, Goldin got hot fast, quickly scoring ten points to guide Michigan to a 42-41 lead. Mixed in was a three-pointer from Wolf that demonstrated his ability score in a variety of ways. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email With the game tight, and Michigan’s offense heating up, Blackwell began to lead Wisconsin’s offense. On three consecutive possessions, Blackwell delivered big-time buckets, putting back a couple of second-chance layups before hitting a smooth pull-up jumper with 12:19 left to make the score 47-44 Wisconsin. For the next few minutes, the Badgers and Wolverines continued to trade baskets, Tonje hitting free throws and a three to re-take the lead at 55-54 on a physical and-one bucket and a made free throw from McGee with 7:11 remaining. But 19 seconds later, Crowl picked up his fourth foul and was immediately replaced by Winter. With the game tied at 55, Winter then lost the ball on offense, resulting in a turnover, got caught in no-man’s land on defense on a Wolf lay-up and was then blocked by Michigan guard Roddy Gayle Jr. after passing up a wide-open wing three. Then, after Wolf and Blackwell traded multiple buckets and Gayle Jr. made a lay-up, McGee hit another huge shot — this time a three — to give Wisconsin a 62-61 lead with 4:14 remaining. But Wisconsin would only convert on one more field goal all night, a Klesmit turn-around jumper to give the Badgers a three-point advantage with 2:37 remaining. With Crowl fouled out, Goldin went to work in the paint and flipped the tide in favor of the Wolverines. Wisconsin had multiple chances in the game’s final moments but failed to convert. In a game that could have gone either way, Wisconsin fell. After the loss, Wisconsin seemed frustrated but not shaken and will now have to soak in its first true adversity of the season before their toughest test of the season thus far. The Badgers head to Milwaukee on Dec. 7 to take on in-state rival No. 5 Marquette. “I think we are going to respond great,” Blackwell said after the loss. “I think we have a great group of vets who have been through this. I mean, you're not going to win every game. We're going to be just fine. We're going to build off this loss, take it on the chin and just keep moving forward." Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State Column: Wisconsin football hits rock bottom as 2024 season comes to a close
Courtesy of Sachin Chheda IN-DEPTH ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Indian American Wisconsinites remain conflicted about Donald Trump’s reelection and party affiliation as the community’s political presence grows. By Sreejita Patra December 6, 2024 | 12:45pm CST On the evening of the election, University of Wisconsin-Madison sophomore Sandy Nayar was glued to the television at a party with a group of left-leaning, predominantly Indian friends. Partygoers were “full of hope” for Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris, Nayar told The Daily Cardinal, drawing up generously blue election prediction maps and preparing to take late-night shots for every state they got wrong. Nobody ended up taking any shots, as the party was over by 7 p.m. Indian Americans have historically sided with Democrats in local, state and national elections, despite the recent surge of prominent Indian American Republicans and nominees for President-elect Donald Trump’s cabinet. A 2024 survey of Indian Americans found 61% of respondents planned to vote for Harris just prior to the election, an 8% decrease from those who voted for President Joe Biden in 2020. But Trump’s reelection is a source of great contention among America’s second largest immigrant group with more Indian Americans than ever self-identifying on the ideological left while also leaving the Democratic Party in favor of independent affiliation or voting Republican. Indian Americans in Wisconsin spoke with the Cardinal about Democrats’ failures to invigorate voters, issues facing their community and how a second Trump presidency could shape America. Indian Americans expect changes in the Trump era but foresee rising political power Indian Americans like Kamala Harris, Nikki Haley, Jay Bhattacharya, Kash Patel and Vivek Ramaswamy have risen to become key players in national politics as part of the “largest and most politically active group among Asian Americans.” Sanchayita Kar and UW-Madison students Heba Haq, Arnav Mahajan and Nayar said they think the community will have a large role in both shaping and being shaped by the upcoming administration. “We’re the dark horses who nobody realizes until they see us at the top,” Mahajan said. “People are now starting to realize what we’re capable of.” Haq said she expects “more Viveks in the future” as Indian Americans prioritize class-based voting over social policy. And Sachin Chheda, former chair of the Milwaukee County Democratic Party, said he has witnessed the community’s economic interests diversify as the number of working-class Indian immigrants has increased. Indian Americans lean liberal, find Trump controversial Kar, a scientist living in Wisconsin since 1998, called Trump a “felon and sexual abuser” elected due to Americans’ distrust of women and Democrats being out-of-touch with the working class. She’s noticed his increasing popularity with young white Americans, particularly men. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I always thought, ‘well, educated white young people, why would they go for Trump?’” Kar said. “But there must be some kind of insecurity they have.” During a new Trump era, Kar fears funding cuts to scientific research in the Environmental Protection Agency, National Institutes of Health and Food and Drug Administration after witnessing a “steady decline” in scientific journals from India throughout the first Trump presidency, she said. Chheda thinks Trump does not align with Indian American values on issues such as racism, economics, immigration and women’s rights. Indian Americans and other minorities who voted for Trump are “pulling the ladder up behind them,” he said. “It’s the willingness of those who are already here to ‘other’ the people who come later, which is a constant in the American story,” Chheda said. But Mahajan voted for Trump despite “disturbing” felony convictions because he thinks his administration will follow through on his promise to grant green cards for foreigners who graduate from U.S. colleges after watching family friends go through years of “stressful” visa and green card renewals despite living long-term in the United States. “I started tuning it out at the end,” Mahajan said. “He has a lot of flaws, but he’s what the U.S. needs to ensure citizens and hard-working immigrants have economic prosperity.” Indian Americans criticize Democrats on foreign policy Widespread disillusionment toward Democrats’ stance on Israel’s war on Gaza may be an important factor in Indian Americans’ rapidly changing political identification since 2020. The percentage of Independents in the community has grown by 11%, and Republican Party affiliation has remained a consistent 21%. Mahajan chose to vote for Trump after seeing President Joe Biden’s handling of Israel’s war on Gaza, he said, primarily because the Democratic administration continued funding Israel and could not end violence in the region. “The Democrats should have resolved the war instead of just selling Israel a bunch of weapons and making money off of it,” Mahajan said. “Trump already reached out to [Benjamin Netanyahu] about bringing it to an end and that kind of immediate action is what moved me toward him. Maybe world peace is around the corner.” Kar, Nayar and UW-Madison junior Heba Haq also considered Israel’s war on Gaza to be a significant flaw in Democratic leadership, despite all voting for Harris. Eight of Haq’s extended family members “protest-voted” for Green Party candidate Jill Stein, she said. Nayar said she voted for Harris as “harm reduction.” “Democrats showed slightly less blood thirstiness for Israel’s constant genocide than Republicans,” Nayar said. “Kamala is still part of the bipartisan establishment, but I thought she would do less harm in office than Trump will.” The invisible hand: Discrimination within and without Despite growing dissatisfaction with the Democratic Party, Indian Americans remain unswayed by the Republican platform due to its association with white Christian nationalism. Haq told the Cardinal a close relative claimed he would vote Republican if Republicans “didn’t hate Muslims.” “They can get behind the religious elements of the Republican Party and their economic bullshittery, but the Muslim-banning turns some people off,” Haq said. “It doesn’t preclude them from voting for Trump, but it does mean they’re less likely to.” Chheda views racism toward South Asians as more explicit and accepted by Republican leadership than Democrats, though he “[doesn’t] think it’s zero on the left.” The experienced former political consultant and campaign director told the Cardinal he had dreams to run for and win political office when he was younger, but never did. “I'm not saying I forgive it, but I'm not going to spend every second of my day complaining about it,” Chheda said. “I've accepted there’s things I haven’t been able to do that I would have if I were the same person with the same story and a white dude with an American name.” Editor's Note: this article was updated at 3:30 p.m. CST on Saturday, Dec. 8, 2024, to clarify Kar's occupation. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Sreejita PatraSreejita Patra is a senior staff writer and the former summer ad sales manager for The Daily Cardinal. She has written for breaking news, campus news and arts and has done extensive reporting on the 2024 presidential race. She also covered the Oregon Village Board for the Oregon Observer. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Two members of SAFEwalk on December 3, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Ellie Huber | The Daily Cardinal OPINION SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Why UW-Madison students, especially women, are instead choosing to walk home alone at night. By Lillie Sunby December 5, 2024 | 3:00am CST Content warning: This article contains mention of sexual assault and violence. Two years ago, as I sat listening to SOAR presenters introduce a long list of safety resources available to incoming students, I felt relieved that I was going to attend a university that cared so much about the safety of the students. Among those resources was SAFEwalk, a system the University of Wisconsin-Madison made to help students get home safely at night. It works by sending students in pairs to a person’s location to walk them anywhere on campus at night so they don’t need to go by themself. At the time, it seemed like a great idea — free, convenient and meant to protect students walking home alone after dark. But after spending two years on campus, I’ve found that despite the university's efforts to promote SAFEwalk, students still refuse to use it. At the beginning of my freshman year, I vividly remember hearing stories of a girl who was brutally attacked by a stranger while walking home alone at night. The details were horrifying, and yet, the story didn’t stop me or other students from continuing to walk home alone. When I asked a fellow student why she avoided the system, she said it’s “become a joke with my friends, we make fun of it.” She went on to explain how being escorted home by two people in neon jackets feels “embarrassing and dramatic,” even if the alternative is walking home completely by herself. She isn’t alone in thinking that way, especially among women, who face a greater risk of harassment or violence when walking alone. Even with such a violent reminder of the potential dangers, many of us weigh the embarrassment of calling SAFEwalk against the risks and still choose to take our chances. But the risks of using SAFEwalk run deeper than facing embarrassment — some students struggle to trust the system altogether. As a current sophomore I spoke with explained, sometimes “walking home with strangers seems even worse than walking alone.” She expressed doubts that the training SAFEwalkers receive does much to build trust. "A lot of police have training…that doesn’t make them trustworthy,” she said. While SAFEwalkers are trained in basic safety and bystander intervention, there is still a lack of transparency about their qualifications, making it difficult to see them as reassuring figures. It also doesn’t help that becoming a SAFEwalker doesn’t seem particularly challenging. The hiring process includes an online group interview followed by a brief training program. Once hired, workers are paid $11 per hour to walk students home between 7 p.m. and 1 a.m. Although it sounds good in theory, in practice, meeting strangers late at night — especially as a woman — can feel just as risky as walking alone. For many students, especially those who are intoxicated after a night out, the option of walking home alone still feels like the safer and less embarrassing choice. The bottom line is, if the university wants to keep students safe, SAFEwalk needs to change. Now, students are forced to choose between the discomfort and awkwardness of calling SAFEwalk — even when it’s the smarter decision — and the dangers of walking home alone. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One potential solution for students living in residence halls could involve House Fellows making group chats for their floors to create walking groups made up of familiar faces. By encouraging students to form connections within their residence halls, they could more easily plan a walk home they feel comfortable with. This approach would get rid of that awkwardness of calling strangers while still addressing the safety concerns of walking alone Another step in the right direction could involve making SAFEwalk feel more personal and transparent. Adding a human element, such as names, photos and short bios of SAFEwalkers, could increase trust and accountability. Sometimes, just knowing who is coming to walk you home could make the experience feel less like meeting a random stranger and more like being assisted by a fellow student. This small change could have the power to reduce feelings of unease that many students have about the service. The bottom line is, even though SAFEwalk was made with good intentions, the program isn’t being used due to a combination of embarrassment, discomfort and lack of trust. If the university wants to make SAFEwalk safe and successful, they need to address these issues by creating a sense of community, increasing transparency and improving training. Until then, the choice between walking alone or calling SAFEwalk will remain a difficult one for many students, especially women, who just want to get home safely. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research Underly's budget proposal is a bold step toward strengthening Wisconsin's public education
RSV F protein revealing the linkage that is the target for future research. Image was created using cryo-electron tomography. Photo courtesy of Wright Lab/UW-Madison SCIENCE New images of RSV may hold key to unlocking new treatments A research team at the University of Wisconsin-Madison produced high-resolution images of RSV structure, important for RSV treatment options and vaccine development. By Elliott Murray October 31, 2024 | 2:00am CDT A research team at the University of Wisconsin-Madison has taken a major step toward deciphering the complexity of the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) structure. Led by Elizabeth Wright, a professor of biochemistry, this team has released new high-resolution images of the virus that will aid in developing new treatment and vaccine options. Globally, RSV is the cause of nearly 3 million hospitalizations and 160,000 deaths annually, according to the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Due to the intricate structure of the virus, treatment and vaccine options are extremely limited. High-risk children can receive preventative treatment, and two vaccines have been recently approved for older adults, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics and the New England Journal of Medicine. But for most Americans, there remains no efficient way to treat or prevent this virus. The Journal of General Virology describes infectious RSV particles as filamentous and pleomorphic, meaning they possess long, thread-like structures that can be irregular in length and width. The complexity of these virus particles has limited development of preventative and treatment drugs — researchers such as Wright’s team have had difficulty determining drug targets within these highly intricate structures. Identifying these drug targets requires an understanding of what proteins regulate the structure of infectious RSV particles. As described in their recent publication in Nature, Wright’s research team produced high-resolution 3D images of the virus and the proteins that determine its structure. Utilizing a technique called cryo-electron tomography, in which infectious RSV particles are frozen at cryogenic temperatures, they were able to inspect the structure of RSV at certain moments in time. They captured 2D images of the frozen infectious viral particles at particular tilt increments. These images were then combined and averaged to computationally generate a 3D representation of the virus structure. An analysis of this 3D representation revealed that the structure of two proteins — RSV M and RSV F proteins — within RSV are particularly critical to understanding the structure of the virus. “The imaging found that the RSV M protein is regulating the structure of these filamentous particles,” Wright said. “The M protein forms a helical-like lattice, and it is this lattice of the protein coming together that is regulating RSV formation.” These RSV M proteins also correspond to the positioning of another protein: RSV F. This membrane protein aids in the fusion of the viral RSV membrane with the host cell membrane. The imaging of the protein structure revealed that RSV F proteins are arranged in pairs. Each pair is held together by a small “tag” or linkage. Wright said her team now intends to investigate the structure of this link between two RSV F proteins. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “We want to take a high-resolution image of the little link so we can engineer some sort of target to keep RSV F proteins linked,” said Wright. By keeping the linkage intact, she told the Cardinal, the virus will not be as infectious. Along with further investigation of the RSV F protein, Wright’s team intends to study other potential drug targets on the interior of the virus. “Having more high-resolution structure images will give us more pieces of the story,” Wright said. As RSV is also related to several other viruses, including measles, rabies and Ebola, according to the Journal of General Virology, her team hopes that their discoveries regarding the structure of RSV can be applied to the development of treatment and vaccines for related viruses. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Column: Wisconsin football hits rock bottom as 2024 season comes to a close After a stunningly poor finish to the season, the Badgers have to pick up the pieces of a lost season. By Dylan Goldman December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Badger fans might as well put on a v-neck sweater and listen to Guns N’ Roses because the Wisconsin football program has dragged itself back to the 1980s. The Badgers, who had a respectable run of success from the mid-1990s to last year, have reached a nadir not seen in a long time. After a dismal 24-7 drubbing against arch-rival Minnesota on Friday, the Badgers lost everything that made the program proud in one day. All at once, they relinquished the cherished Paul Bunyan’s axe to the Gophers and lost their 22-year bowl streak. The Badgers last missed a bowl game in 2001, marking the last time they finished the season with a losing record. That year was an outlier, however, because then-head coach Barry Alvarez immediately corrected course before handing the program off to Bret Bielema. Bielema led the program to three Rose Bowl appearances between 2010 and 2012. Paul Chryst later led the Badgers to victories in the Cotton and Orange Bowls alongside a Rose Bowl appearance in 2020. While the Badgers didn’t compete for a national championship, they won Big Ten titles and made it to the nation’s premier bowl games during this period. When UW Athletics hired head coach Luke Fickell from Cincinnati in 2022, he was expected to take the program back to the heights it had reached in the last 20 years. Fickell’s first season was a bumpy ride, but ended with a victory at Minnesota and a competitive loss in the ReliaQuest Bowl against a strong LSU team. Ideally, teams are supposed to continue progressing every year a new coach is around. This season started promising as the Badgers started 5-2 and played a competitive game against Penn State. Then, the season quickly went off the rails. Wisconsin lost their third straight game to rival Iowa, this time 42-10 and in embarrassing fashion. A close game against Oregon was hopeful, but the Badgers failed to build off it. The Badgers still had a chance to close the season strong but failed miserably. They got blown out by Nebraska 44-25, giving over the Freedom Trophy to the Cornhuskers in their first loss to Nebraska since 2012. Then came the abysmal showing against Minnesota. The Golden Gophers, who came in with a 6-5 record, ran the Badgers out of Camp Randall in resounding fashion. The game showed that the Badgers have a massive void at the quarterback position, but the team also displayed a shocking level of apathy against a bitter rival. In year two of the Fickell regime, there is nothing to write home about. Wisconsin lost all of its rivalry trophies and gave up the precious streaks the program had been celebrating as a sign of its consistency. The Badgers went a meager 3-6 in Big Ten play, with wins coming against a dismal Purdue team and the others against middling programs in Rutgers and Northwestern. Players like linebacker Leon Lowery and cornerback Amare Snowden have already announced their intentions to enter the transfer portal, and there will surely be more that join them in the coming days. Wisconsin’s schedule was undoubtedly tough, but that does not excuse its performance in 2024. The Florida Gators faced an impossible schedule, but they still finished 7-5 with strong wins against LSU and No. 14 Ole Miss. If Florida could make a bowl game, so could Wisconsin. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email While a lot of games on Wisconsin’s schedule were difficult, the fact that Fickell doesn’t have a marquee win so far is alarming. The Badgers have hosted Ohio State, Alabama, Penn State and Oregon in his tenure. While most of those games were competitive, Wisconsin came up short each time. A quick autopsy of the team will show that in addition to poor quarterback play, the defense regressed well below Wisconsin standards. Gone are the days of TJ Watt and others wreaking havoc. This year's defense ranked No. 12 in the Big Ten and only forced eight turnovers. The Badgers have gone from having reliable quarterback play, a dominant running game and a very strong defense to having nothing. Their identity in the Fickell era is still undefined, and they will have to figure it out quickly if the head coach wants to stick around Madison for long. Phil Longo and his “Air Raid” offense has been dispatched, and depending on the fate of defensive coordinator Mike Tressel, Fickell will get a mulligan at forging his team’s identity. Fickell’s credentials are well understood. He has been successful before, and his accomplishments at Cincinnati prove he can build a program. But this is not the American Athletic Conference. The new Big Ten is daunting. Oregon has run roughshod through the conference in its first year. USC and Washington are strong programs that can get going at any time. The Badgers need to figure out how to compete in the new era of conference realignment and NIL. They must re-establish their identity by finding one that contrasts them with conference powers like Oregon and Ohio State. Considering Indiana went 11-1 this season, Wisconsin clearly can still find its way. But if they can’t, the Badgers risk being reduced to a college football afterthought. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights Wisconsin unable to contain Michigan’s two-headed monster, falls 67-64 in Big Ten battle at Kohl Center Wisconsin volleyball finishes regular season strong with win against Michigan State
The Wisconsin Design Team photographed on October 2, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE Wisconsin Design Team sets the stage for stylish Wisco apparel This Wisconsin-inspired, student-made clothing brand chose to stand out. By Lauren Aguila October 3, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Located in the heart of Madison’s State Street, there stands a retail store unlike any other. From their misspelled “Wicisnosn” shirts to their quirky cornfield mesh shorts, Wisconsin Design Team knew their target audience from the beginning. Wisconsin Design Team (WDT), founded in 2021 by UW alumni Sam Anglehart, Briar Ion and Josh Kuhn, represents how creativity can flourish in the right setting. With their social media content — specifically their trendy TikTok videos — involvement in community events like the Madison Night Market and collaborations with city hotspots like The Kollege Klub, WDT is achieving big milestones for a rapidly-growing small business. Madelyn Lawrence, the director of retail operations at WDT, graduated from the School of Human Ecology and joined the executive team in 2023. She is currently a member of their four-person design team, working closely with the custom design-making process and planning out their creative direction for the future. Lawrence also oversees the storefront and manages their sales associate team. “We all went here at one point or another and saw this gap in the [collegiate apparel] market,” Lawrence told The Daily Cardinal. “There's not much cool stuff to wear to games or it's all the same — we'll see the same stuff.” The three original WDT founders began their business’ journey with the iconic arc logo design with “Wisconsin” placed cleverly on a pair of colored sweatpants. Their streetwear-esque approach instantly stood out on campus and led to their success. The team started posting on Instagram, and it “just blew up,” according to Lawrence. “I think because we’re younger, we have a different eye,” Lawrence said. “We want the designs to be more fun and interesting than just the word ‘Wisconsin’ on a t-shirt.” Having collaborated with Madison businesses and UW-Madison student organizations such as Moda Madison, WDT also partnered with local hospital departments of UnityPoint Meriter Hospital and the American Family Children’s Hospital to create customized apparel designs. Looking ahead, Wisconsin Design Team plans to expand their presence beyond Madison, particularly by acquiring more licenses for other universities, Lawrence said. The company has already partnered with the University of Iowa and hopes their parent company, Design Team Enterprises, can help them secure licenses for other schools. WDT’s authenticity sets it apart from other collegiate apparel brands. You can tell if a clothing item is a Wisconsin Design Team piece or not. According to Lawrence, the entire team has “their own unique style,” and the energy you feel when in the store is “inviting and energetic.” “We are like a big family,” Lawrence said. “When you see that aspect in a brand, it makes you want to shop there more.” Despite their goals to incorporate other universities in their apparel designs, the WDT team will always consider Madison their home base. “I think Wisconsin will always be a main focus for us because we're all from here and it's a homey place,” Lawrence said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin Design Team symbolizes many ideas:teamwork, school pride, self-identity,but believing in your brand is the strongest essence they hold. Lawrence’s best advice to future UW-Madison entrepreneurs: To use your local resources. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lauren AguilaLauren Aguila is a current photographer and writer for The Daily Cardinal. You can check out her work on Instagram at @shot.sbylaguila. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo by The Daily Cardinal | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Art is central to protest in Madison. Here's how its mediums have changed campus From the Vietnam War to pro-Palestine encampments, art as a form of protest and political expression has long been central to UW-Madison’s history. By Annika Bereny October 24, 2024 | 4:00am CDT In June of 1991, two members of LGBTQ+ rights organization Act Up! Madison put on diapers, bibs and frilly bonnets. They were protesting the denial of day care services to an HIV-positive mother in Madison, and though their method was uncommon, it garnered attention through art. Madison is known for its extensive history of protest. But art and different forms of self-expression have been central to both social life and protest at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Many look back on protests during the Civil Rights and anti-war movement in the 1960s and 1970s and characterize them as just chants, marches or the occasional sit-in. But there was also creation — from graffiti, music, paintings, performances, poems and more, artivism has become central to UW-Madison. As the Elvehjem building was constructed in 1966, soon to become the Chazen Museum of Art, a plywood fence around it became filled with political graffiti and street art. Messages such as “Where is Lee Harvey Oswald now that we really need him?” were commonplace on the fence, alongside “Lock up McNamara, throw away Ky,” a reference to the secretary of defense and South Vietnamese prime minister. At its inception, the Chazen had already hosted UW-Madison’s protest art. “Art has been used as a political device, protest or otherwise, for propaganda or for conveying an agenda of some sort,” Katherine Alcauskas, the chief curator of the Chazen, told The Daily Cardinal. “In fine art and in poster production, there's a lot of ways that images can tell very meaningful stories.” Artwork, whether intended to be political or not, is often adopted by a political cause, she continued. Amid the anti-war movement of the 1960s, UW-Madison students and faculty channeled anger toward police brutality through art. Warrington Colescott, professor emeritus of printmaking and painting at UW-Madison, created a piece in 1969 called “Out of a Garden Window” while teaching. Colescott depicts a protester being beaten and arrested by police, with other protesters being corralled away and an audience forming in front of their suburban houses. It is thought to be directly inspired by the anti-Vietnam war protests on campus. This piece appeared as part of a 2018 exhibit “Print in Protest” at the Chazen, highlighting the role of UW-Madison’s printmaking department in the school’s history of protest. Decades later, during the Black Lives Matter protests in the summer of 2020, murals in Madison and nationwide commemorated victims of police brutality and called for change. Both officially commissioned murals from the city of Madison and solo graffiti were found on walls and boarded up windows all across town. Colescott’s piece reflects both the attitudes of yesterday as well as today. His art is timeless, demonstrating the longevity of anti-police brutality action and activism Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Aside from visual art, protest can also be created for the other senses, such as music and spoken word. In Madison, the Forward! Marching Band, founded during the Act 10 protests, spent weeks playing around the Capitol in protest. Since then, the group has “dedicated itself to maintaining that unique fighting spirit of the Wisconsin protest movement.” During the #TheRealUW movement in 2016, UW students, alumni and faculty of color rebuked the racism they had been subjected to while students at UW-Madison, a one-day-only exhibit was held at the Chazen called “Unhood Yourself: The Real UW.” “It will be impossible to ignore the energy and passion that each of the artists bring to the Chazen,” the exhibit’s press release read. “Here, they will live in expression and present the truth. Without veils, without anonymity, unhooded.” In addition to spoken word performances, this exhibit included photography and collages from students who led the movement online, meant to “engulf” students in the day-to-day experience of their classmates of color. Recently, specific iconography and phrases, often in support of the pro-Palestine movement, on protest banners have become subject to confiscation by law enforcement officials. And, with the recent implementation of UW-Madison’s “expressive activity” policy, protest art may be in danger, at least while 25 feet from a campus building. Yet, some fight to keep this tradition alive. The Division of Arts administers an artivism grant for students who demonstrate an interest in activism through art. In the 2022-2023 school year, the grant funded 12 projects using a total of $12,400 and plans to reopen applications for the current school year later in the semester. Student publication the Madison Journal of Literary Criticism has been a recipient of this grant multiple times. Editor-in-Chief Landis Varughese told The Daily Cardinal the effects of artivism, including the experiences and art of Palestinians during Israel’s ongoing war in Gaza, is crucial to social change. “[Art] makes entry points to activism much more accessible because people may not be really inclined to read dense theory about political activism,” Varughese said. “For people who are halfway around the world, who may not be able to fully comprehend [the Palestinians’] strife firsthand, the way that they can be able to have a glimpse into their world for even just for a second through art is really powerful. And it's able to show us that we aren't so distant, after all.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Can the Badgers maintain their hot start as they enter Big Ten play? Predictions for the remainder of the Wisconsin men’s basketball regular season. By Daniel Desmond December 3, 2024 | 5:13pm CST The Badgers men’s basketball team is off to a surprising 8-0 start to begin the year and are currently ranked No. 11 in the most recent AP Poll. With a blowout win against Arizona and commanding victories over the University of Central Florida and the University of Pittsburgh to win the Greenbrier Tip-Off Tournament, the Badgers have an impressive early season resume. The Badgers are now set to enter their toughest stretch of the season, with their Big Ten conference schedule beginning at home against Michigan on Dec. 3. What to expect from the newly expanded Big Ten this year Oregon, Washington, UCLA and USC are all playing their inaugural seasons as members of the Big Ten conference. These new schools add to an already competitive year in the Big Ten, which is currently the only Division I conference where every team has five or more wins to begin the year. Additionally, 11 teams in the conference have one or no losses so far. Like the Badgers, Oregon is also off to a hot 8-0 start and are currently ranked No. 12 in the AP Poll. No. 8 Purdue, the consensus preseason favorite to win the Big Ten, are off to a strong 7-1 start. Before the season, Kevin Sweeney of Sports Illustrated predicted Rutgers would finish sixth in the Big Ten partly because the Scarlet Knights are led by Dylan Harper and Ace Bailey, two potential top-five picks in the upcoming NBA Draft in 2025. Overall, the Big Ten will be highly competitive, and there are no “layup” games for any team. What to expect from the Badgers in Big Ten play Last season, the Badgers’ Big Ten conference schedule was a grind. Wisconsin went 11-9 and had a stretch where they lost seven out of nine games. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email But this year’s roster is entirely different as Wisconsin lost and replaced eight players during the off-season. Despite the majority of the team having never played with each other before this season, Wisconsin’s offense is off to a tremendous start. The Badgers average 80.3 points per game, the 23rd highest average in the country. They lead the nation in free throw percentage (86.4%) and have the 19th highest offensive rating in the country, according to KenPom. Missouri transfer John Tonje has been the star of this potent Badgers offense. Tonje, who was named Big Ten Player of the Week the last two weeks, is averaging 22.9 points per game — the eighth highest out of any player in college basketball. Will the Badgers be able to maintain their high-level offense during Big Ten play? “It’s a long season. We’re not even a quarter of the way through it,” head coach Greg Gard said in a press conference following the team’s win over Chicago State on Saturday. “We'll get ready to jump into Big Ten play." When asked about tough shooting stretches and the offense becoming stagnant, Gard said, “Just keep playing, right?” “You know, there are gonna be ebbs and flows to the game. You make sure that you take care of the ball. But make sure you're getting the right shots,” he said. According to TeamRankings, the Badgers turn the ball over at the 14th lowest rate and have the 18th best turnover-to-assist ratio in the country. As experience with the Big Ten gauntlet has taught Gard and his staff, if the Badgers continue to have efficient possessions and maintain their low turnover rate, the offense can continue their success as they make their way through the conference schedule. Concerns ahead for Badgers on the road Last year, the Badgers went 3-9 on the road and shot 11 of their 14 lowest field goal percentages of the season at opposing and neutral sites. The Badgers have yet to take on an opponent’s home court this year, and their first big test will be this Saturday in Milwaukee against No. 5 Marquette. Later on in the season, the Badgers have a slew of really tough conference away contests. Strong performances on the road against Rutgers on Jan. 6, Purdue on Feb. 5 and Michigan State on March 2 will be pivotal to the Badgers’ hopes of winning a Big Ten regular season title. With the 18-team expansion of the Big Ten, the Badgers will travel all the way out to Southern California to take on both the University of Southern California and the University of Los Angeles in January. Big Ten play is always a challenge and there will be bumps along the way. However, if the Badgers can maintain their dominant offense and have players close out games in big moments on the road, this team has the potential to be atop the Big Ten standings and poised for a potential run in a Big Ten and NCAA tournament in March. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80
Courtesy of Sachin Chheda IN-DEPTH ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Indian American Wisconsinites remain conflicted about Donald Trump’s reelection and party affiliation as the community’s political presence grows. By Sreejita Patra December 6, 2024 | 12:45pm CST On the evening of the election, University of Wisconsin-Madison sophomore Sandy Nayar was glued to the television at a party with a group of left-leaning, predominantly Indian friends. Partygoers were “full of hope” for Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris, Nayar told The Daily Cardinal, drawing up generously blue election prediction maps and preparing to take late-night shots for every state they got wrong. Nobody ended up taking any shots, as the party was over by 7 p.m. Indian Americans have historically sided with Democrats in local, state and national elections, despite the recent surge of prominent Indian American Republicans and nominees for President-elect Donald Trump’s cabinet. A 2024 survey of Indian Americans found 61% of respondents planned to vote for Harris just prior to the election, an 8% decrease from those who voted for President Joe Biden in 2020. But Trump’s reelection is a source of great contention among America’s second largest immigrant group with more Indian Americans than ever self-identifying on the ideological left while also leaving the Democratic Party in favor of independent affiliation or voting Republican. Indian Americans in Wisconsin spoke with the Cardinal about Democrats’ failures to invigorate voters, issues facing their community and how a second Trump presidency could shape America. Indian Americans expect changes in the Trump era but foresee rising political power Indian Americans like Kamala Harris, Nikki Haley, Jay Bhattacharya, Kash Patel and Vivek Ramaswamy have risen to become key players in national politics as part of the “largest and most politically active group among Asian Americans.” Sanchayita Kar and UW-Madison students Heba Haq, Arnav Mahajan and Nayar said they think the community will have a large role in both shaping and being shaped by the upcoming administration. “We’re the dark horses who nobody realizes until they see us at the top,” Mahajan said. “People are now starting to realize what we’re capable of.” Haq said she expects “more Viveks in the future” as Indian Americans prioritize class-based voting over social policy. And Sachin Chheda, former chair of the Milwaukee County Democratic Party, said he has witnessed the community’s economic interests diversify as the number of working-class Indian immigrants has increased. Indian Americans lean liberal, find Trump controversial Kar, a scientist living in Wisconsin since 1998, called Trump a “felon and sexual abuser” elected due to Americans’ distrust of women and Democrats being out-of-touch with the working class. She’s noticed his increasing popularity with young white Americans, particularly men. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email “I always thought, ‘well, educated white young people, why would they go for Trump?’” Kar said. “But there must be some kind of insecurity they have.” During a new Trump era, Kar fears funding cuts to scientific research in the Environmental Protection Agency, National Institutes of Health and Food and Drug Administration after witnessing a “steady decline” in scientific journals from India throughout the first Trump presidency, she said. Chheda thinks Trump does not align with Indian American values on issues such as racism, economics, immigration and women’s rights. Indian Americans and other minorities who voted for Trump are “pulling the ladder up behind them,” he said. “It’s the willingness of those who are already here to ‘other’ the people who come later, which is a constant in the American story,” Chheda said. But Mahajan voted for Trump despite “disturbing” felony convictions because he thinks his administration will follow through on his promise to grant green cards for foreigners who graduate from U.S. colleges after watching family friends go through years of “stressful” visa and green card renewals despite living long-term in the United States. “I started tuning it out at the end,” Mahajan said. “He has a lot of flaws, but he’s what the U.S. needs to ensure citizens and hard-working immigrants have economic prosperity.” Indian Americans criticize Democrats on foreign policy Widespread disillusionment toward Democrats’ stance on Israel’s war on Gaza may be an important factor in Indian Americans’ rapidly changing political identification since 2020. The percentage of Independents in the community has grown by 11%, and Republican Party affiliation has remained a consistent 21%. Mahajan chose to vote for Trump after seeing President Joe Biden’s handling of Israel’s war on Gaza, he said, primarily because the Democratic administration continued funding Israel and could not end violence in the region. “The Democrats should have resolved the war instead of just selling Israel a bunch of weapons and making money off of it,” Mahajan said. “Trump already reached out to [Benjamin Netanyahu] about bringing it to an end and that kind of immediate action is what moved me toward him. Maybe world peace is around the corner.” Kar, Nayar and UW-Madison junior Heba Haq also considered Israel’s war on Gaza to be a significant flaw in Democratic leadership, despite all voting for Harris. Eight of Haq’s extended family members “protest-voted” for Green Party candidate Jill Stein, she said. Nayar said she voted for Harris as “harm reduction.” “Democrats showed slightly less blood thirstiness for Israel’s constant genocide than Republicans,” Nayar said. “Kamala is still part of the bipartisan establishment, but I thought she would do less harm in office than Trump will.” The invisible hand: Discrimination within and without Despite growing dissatisfaction with the Democratic Party, Indian Americans remain unswayed by the Republican platform due to its association with white Christian nationalism. Haq told the Cardinal a close relative claimed he would vote Republican if Republicans “didn’t hate Muslims.” “They can get behind the religious elements of the Republican Party and their economic bullshittery, but the Muslim-banning turns some people off,” Haq said. “It doesn’t preclude them from voting for Trump, but it does mean they’re less likely to.” Chheda views racism toward South Asians as more explicit and accepted by Republican leadership than Democrats, though he “[doesn’t] think it’s zero on the left.” The experienced former political consultant and campaign director told the Cardinal he had dreams to run for and win political office when he was younger, but never did. “I'm not saying I forgive it, but I'm not going to spend every second of my day complaining about it,” Chheda said. “I've accepted there’s things I haven’t been able to do that I would have if I were the same person with the same story and a white dude with an American name.” Editor's Note: this article was updated at 3:30 p.m. CST on Saturday, Dec. 8, 2024, to clarify Kar's occupation. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Sreejita PatraSreejita Patra is a senior staff writer and the former summer ad sales manager for The Daily Cardinal. She has written for breaking news, campus news and arts and has done extensive reporting on the 2024 presidential race. She also covered the Oregon Village Board for the Oregon Observer. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks
Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Hovde will not concede U.S. Senate race despite no evidence of fraud The Republican U.S. Senate candidate is one of two Republican Senate candidates nationwide who have yet to concede their races. By Tomer Ronen November 18, 2024 | 2:00am CST Republican U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde has yet to concede in his race against Democratic incumbent Sen. Tammy Baldwin, despite the Associated Press calling the race for Baldwin on Nov. 6. Hovde, who lost by about 29,000 votes, received about 54,000 fewer votes than President-elect Donald Trump. Baldwin received about 5,000 more votes than Vice President Kamala Harris. Along with Arizona Republican Kari Lake, Hovde is one of two Republican U.S. Senate candidates who have yet to concede. In a video released on social media Nov. 12, Hovde said he was “shocked” by what happened on election night, claiming about 108,000 absentee ballots were counted in Milwaukee at 4 a.m., with Baldwin receiving nearly 90% of the votes. Because Milwaukee counts absentee ballots at a central location, reports are released all at once when counting is complete. Baldwin received about 80% of Milwaukee’s absentee votes, according to a Milwaukee Journal Sentinel fact check. Wisconsin’s biggest city is historically heavily Democratic, with Baldwin winning 71.5% of the vote against Wisconsin State Sen. Leah Vukmir in Milwaukee County in 2018. The Milwaukee Election Commission also had to recount about 34,000 ballots on Election Day after the doors of tabulator machines were not locked and sealed. Both parties agreed nothing wrong was done, according to Wisconsin Elections Commission Chair Ann Jacobs. Hovde also claimed certain precincts in Milwaukee had over 200% voter turnout, a claim the Wisconsin Elections Commission refuted in a Nov. 14 statement. “What happened in this election does not inspire confidence in our process, and that is wrong,” Hovde said. “Once all options are reviewed, I will announce my decision on how I will proceed.” In Wisconsin, candidates can only ask for a recount if they trail by one percentage point or less. In the official tally, Hovde currently trails Baldwin by 0.9%. Wisconsin precincts have until Nov. 19 to certify their results. “Eric Hovde is spreading lies from the darkest corners of the internet to undercut our free and fair elections,” Baldwin said in a Nov. 12 tweet. “Wisconsin voters made their voices heard. It's time for Hovde to stop this disgusting attack on our democracy and concede.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Vice President Kamala Harris smiles with her hands outstretched as a crowd of supporters cheer during a rally at the Alliant Energy Center in Madison, Wis. on September, 20, 2024. Photo by Maggie Spinney | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Rallies won’t educate you. That’s your job When you like a candidate, it isn’t always for the right reasons. By Surya Sethi September 26, 2024 | 2:00am CDT A campaign rally or a Wisconsin football game? The atmosphere in the Alliant Energy Center on Friday merged both. Vice President Harris’ team knew what they were doing. They got everyone up hours before Harris even stepped on stage by playing the one song that will get any Wisconsin student on their feet: Jump Around. Shortly thereafter, campaign staff handed out signs reading “Badgers for Harris-Walz” that attendees excitedly waved around. Much like after a football game, there was a sense of solidarity. Even though it’s a good feeling, it’s not in your best interest to vote based on a feeling. Local politicians and community leaders spoke fervently of both Wisconsin and national politics to energize the crowd. Speakers, such as Sen. Tammy Baldwin, U.S. Rep. Mark Pocan and Gov. Tony Evers took the podium to share their support for Harris and remind attendees of the importance of their vote in November. Then, Harris stepped out. She took her time walking out to “Freedom” by Beyoncé, turning around repeatedly as she made her way to the podium to make sure everyone in the audience could see her clap, wave, point and smile. Even though I planned on keeping her platform at the forefront of my mind, the energy in the room got the best of me. For the next 30 minutes, she held everyone in a trance. When she spoke of leading with joy, you could see smiles across the stands. When she spoke about the state of abortion rights, I could feel her conviction and thinly veiled anger. By the time she was done, the stadium was so loud, you could hardly hear the person next to you rushing you to leave before traffic started. I’ll be honest, it worked on me. I resonated with her frustrations as a woman of color, and I so badly wanted to share her optimistic view for the future. But as I walked out of the stadium, I contemplated if I truly agreed with her political views any more than I did when I arrived, or if I was caught up in the excitement of seeing, potentially, the next president. That’s the point of events like these, for you to associate a feeling with a candidate instead of facts and issues. After all, it’s easier to cast a vote when you feel like you know the person than when you’re stuck reading about them online. Coming from a campaign standpoint, it’s a smart move. But it’s not one we should fall victim to. Despite her team’s concerted effort to curate a very specific atmosphere, we should remember to remain critical and keep her platform in mind. I was personally reminded of this when I started walking home and saw pro-Palestine demonstrators gathered outside the arena. There’s a reason why during her debate with former President Trump, she supported Israel regarding the war in Gaza, yet there was no mention of her support for Israel during her rally. And who’s to blame her? She knows it’s a divisive subject that’s fracturing her Democratic base. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email This excitement isn’t unique to Harris supporters. No matter the candidate, it’s exciting to see who you’re going to vote for. It’s an opportunity everyone should absolutely take advantage of. But going to a rally and hearing from the candidate themself doesn’t absolve you of your civic responsibility to independently inform yourself of their stances and actions. Surya Sethi is a sophomore studying political science and international studies. Do you agree that you shouldn't let a rally determine your vote? Send all comments to opinion@dailycardinal.com. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo by Darren Lee. ARTS World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit The show featured a lively cast, including University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Izabel Nettey. By Mary Bosch December 5, 2024 | 3:00am CST Capital City Theatre premiered a modern but timeless musical adaptation of the Christmas classic “It’s a Wonderful Life” with music by Artistic Director Andrew Abrams and John Atkins at Mitby Theater from Nov. 22 to Dec. 1. Small modernizations, such as having the traditionally male comedic duo played by women, fleshing out the female characters and taking a less shameful view on suicide, brought the traditional themes to a new audience. “[The audience] sees the movie they love through the lens of where we are today and with more, I think the key word here is acceptance,” Abrams said. “I think everybody today needs more acceptance.” Abrams and I agree — the cast is fantastic. Eddie Egan perfectly embodied leading man George Bailey with a warm timbre and old-timey voice reminiscent of Sinatra. While Abrams said the New York professional carried the show, I think he struggled on some high notes. It was the small town Wisconsinites who stole the show. The dancer with the cleanest lines and sharpest hits had to be University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Izabel Nettey. From Menomonee Falls, Wis., Nettey landed the role of Ruth, George’s sister-in-law, through a connection with the show’s choreographer Michael Staneck, who also choreographs the UW-Madison Wisconsin Singers. The show taught her an important lesson, especially as a young adult. “This musical has reminded me that I am going the right direction no matter where I go,” Nettey said. Photo by Darren Lee. Jessica Minter played Violet with infectious energy and controlled, methodical movements. In George’s alternate universe, she expertly shifted from a naive girl to a woman using her femininity for her own gain. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The angel Clarence, played by Jason Williams, had fantastic physical comedy and an incredible voice. Every lyric he sang went along with a precise choreographed movement. And when George’s wife Mary sang, I swear I could hear her heart calling out for love. The gentle vibrato in Sarah Ellis’ voice held so much emotion. In one of this adaptation’s major changes, the play sought to flesh out female characters’ stories. “Especially in the case of Mary, she's not just like a pretty face,” Nettey said. “She wants something. She wants a family, a life, and it's not just because she's a woman.” One of the most striking aspects of the show was the set — the larger-than-life buildings rolled on and off-stage by the actors brought the audience into the bustling little town of Bedford Falls. “The town is a character in the show,” Abrams said. “Because in the movie, the care and community are so prominent.” Abrams and John Atkins unknowingly wrote the first song for the musical 20 years ago in New York. Fast forward a decade, they decided to write the full show and eventually brought it to Capital City Theater. Atkins wrote the lyrics while Abrams set it to music. Evan Lang assisted Atkins and Abrams by orchestrating and conducting the band on hand. Atkins changed lines throughout the process, and Lang made changes to scores up until days before they opened, according to Abrams. The entire show was a collaborative effort, meaning the actors and musicians had to be on their game. When all was said and done, Abrams couldn’t believe what they created. “We just wrote a couple songs for this play, and look, it's on a stage with all these people in an orchestra and in lighting,” he said. ”You just kind of can't take it in when you write a new show, and all of a sudden it's on stage, and you're like, wait, we finished that, and people are doing it. It's absolutely nuts. I mean, it's crazy, it's amazing.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Dominion Resources Greentech Incubator/Flickr SCIENCE Dairyland Power Cooperative awarded $579 million to accelerate Wisconsin’s clean energy transition The U.S. Department of Agriculture with support from the Clean Energy Community initiative and UW-Madison College of Engineering, awarded Dairyland Power Cooperative $579 million for new renewable energy projects. By Rusal Ferus September 26, 2024 | 4:00am CDT Dairyland Power Cooperative, one of western Wisconsin’s largest energy providers, received $579 million from the Biden administration Sept. 5 to enhance wind and solar energy in rural Wisconsin. This funding is part of the new Empowering Rural America (ERA) grant, which will provide around $9.7 billion to major rural electrification groups throughout the United States. The award will enable the production of 1,020 megawatts of renewable energy and reduce pollution by approximately 3.3 million metric tons annually through eight total solar and wind projects across the four states the cooperative serves. The ERA program is part of the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act and is a large initiative from the Biden-Harris administration’s plan to improve rural economies through the construction of clean energy and climate infrastructure. It’s the largest investment in rural electrification since President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the Rural Electrification Act into law in 1936. New ERA will drive substantial carbon reduction across the Dairyland system, facilitate new economic growth and job creation, promote environmental stewardship and lower energy costs for rural and agricultural communities,” Dairyland Power Cooperative President and CEO Brent Ridge said in a statement. With this transition, Dairyland’s customers will see their electricity bills decrease by an estimated 42% over the next decade. Dairyland Power Cooperative, headquartered in LaCrosse, Wisconsin, is made up of 24 distribution cooperatives and 27 municipal utilities across Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois and Minnesota. The cooperative aims to diversify its energy sources — including wind, solar, natural gas, coal, hydro and biogas — to provide reliable energy to their customers. The Dairyland Power Cooperative has already cut its coal production by 579 megawatts since 2014 and will continue to cut down their coal investments with this funding, according to a press release. These projects aim to lower pollution and improve health for vulnerable populations, including children and people ages 65 and older, who are at high risk of respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses. Moving away from fossil fuel energy also aids in mitigating climate change stressors, like extreme weather and heat. The Clean Energy Community Initiative, a collaboration with the University of Wisconsin-Madison College of Engineering, Department of Life Science Communication and the Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, assisted Dairyland through the grant proposal process, focusing on community engagement, energy justice and job development. The initiative champions community engagement to accelerate the clean energy transition in Wisconsin. “We have created a partner network to support such large-scale clean-energy projects to aid in an equitable execution along community priorities and needs, and to leverage the projects for sustainable community benefits through career perspectives and the advantages of technology innovation,” Oliver Schmitz, director of the Grainger Institute for Engineering at UW-Madison, said in a statement. The Clean Energy Community Initiative will continue supporting Dairyland through establishing a farmer benefit and union engagement plan to facilitate engagement between the community and different stakeholders. “Renewable energy is the path forward. It immediately improves lives through cleaner air and more affordable bills, bringing prosperity and better health to rural Wisconsinites,” Abby Novinska-Lois, the executive director of Healthy Climate Wisconsin, said in a statement. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo courtesy of StageQ. ARTS ‘Angry Fags’ gives a hilarious look into the minds of terrorists StageQ’s adaptation of the political comedy offers a cynical view of queerness, electoral politics and murder. By Oliver Gerharz November 14, 2024 | 3:00am CST “Angry Fags” is a campy play full of oddball characters and dialogue that feels human yet hilarious. It’s also about queer sorrow and rage inspired by homophobia and is a dialogue between ideas on how to resist bigotry. "Angry Fags," running at the Bartell Theatre from Nov. 1-16, was put on by StageQ, a Madison organization dedicated to theater covering LGBTQ+ topics. At the start of "Angry Fags," the audience is introduced to Bennet Riggs (Jonah Hirst) and Thomas “Coop” Cooper (Jack Garton) as they share a bottle of wine, joke about their work crushes and use explosives to assassinate a political opponent. After that flash-forward, the first act of the 120-minute play introduces Bennet as a communications staffer on the team of Georgia State Sen. Alison Haines (Molly Maslin). Haines is up for re-election, an incumbent accused of prioritizing her own agenda as a lesbian instead of the needs of the people. On top of political conflict, "Angry Fags" follows a romance between Bennet and Adam (Matt Reines), the chief of staff on Haines’ campaign. Bennet and Adam’s relationship is supported by their coworker Kimberly (Vi Williams) — that is to say, as a married straight woman, she thinks it's hot that two guys are kissing. Kimberly is probably the funniest part of this play, at one point giving Bennet a brief list of gay guys she thinks he should hook up with “for her.” After a day on the job, Bennet returns home and exchanges some very real-feeling banter with his roommate Cooper. Cooper tells Bennet about running into Bennet’s ex-boyfriend Sammy the night before, and the roommates mock Sammy for going home with an unattractive and straight-looking man that night. Then Cooper gets a call that Sammy has been found badly beaten — that man Sammy “went home with” is the prime suspect. The reality shift that happens at this moment is what “Angry Fags” is best at. From this point on, suspense and narrative discomfort slowly build as comedy and tragedy sit side by side and eventually blur together. While his boss sticks to a moderate and politically-conscious response to the attack, Bennet is enraged. He laments the homophobes that perpetuate these attacks don’t fear any repercussions from the gay community. Bennet and Cooper discuss how someone needs to strike fear into their hearts so that they can “protect the tribe” from these attacks. Cooper becomes this protector when he sees Sammy’s attacker outside of a Home Depot and murders him, leading into the play’s second act. Things quickly start to spiral out of control. Bennet and Cooper start to assassinate homophobic public figures, and the play’s central conflict as one between moderation and extremism shines bright through the second act as the roommates kill their homophobic political opponents. This might sound serious, but it cannot be stressed enough that despite an increasingly dark subject matter, "Angry Fags" remains hilarious throughout. The bleak yet queer dialogue between Cooper and Bennet is a constant delight. They fluctuate effortlessly between trivial gossip and where to draw the line when it comes to killing their enemies. Even though the play was originally performed in 2013, the political messaging of the play is relevant in the current political moment — with Haines and her opponent Peggy Musgrove (Renee Reed) in many ways reminiscent of the recent presidential election. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Musgrove, a Black woman running as a republican, is particularly threatening to Haines because she is more of an outsider than Haines. Though Haines was once an activist, she has mellowed out into a part of the political machine in the time she’s been in office. Similar to 2024 presidential candidate Kamala Harris, Haines is reluctant to take an extreme position on anything for fear of losing moderate voters. Some of her campaign staff agree with this stance, but Bennet disagrees in a way that drives him away from the campaign and toward Cooper’s extremism. In one scene, Adam and Bennett briefly discuss their divergent viewpoints on Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, arguing about why she lost. One argues that she failed to win over the electorate because she was tied to Bill Clinton and did not become the feminist icon she would have if she left him. With how this play has been consistently updated to include modern political references, I would be shocked if there was not someday a version of this play where this discussion is more focused on Harris than Clinton. The discussion of Clinton clinging too close to her husband and losing votes from the left maps straight onto Harris clinging too close to President Joe Biden and losing votes from the left. Ultimately, the central dialogue between liberalism and leftist extremism that this play walks the audience through resolves without clarity. Both perspectives are treated rationally and fully argued through, allowing the audience to draw their own conclusions. In the end it is unclear about who is correct on what the best way to achieve their political motivations are. However, it should be noted that while there is a political question at play, there is no doubt as to the moral question — Bennet and Cooper kill too many people for that debate to have two sides. In a 2015 interview with Backstage Magazine, playwright Topher Payne said that “if you can make someone laugh, they listen. And they lean in, and they want to hear more. And once you have that level of engagement, then you can start layering in a message that you want them to take away.” "Angry Fags" embodies its creator’s philosophy. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
CLEAN community executive Amanda Sadowski (left) and community team member Natalie Bouzas (right) urge students to sign an energy burden disclosure petition on Nov. 1, 2024. Photo by Lindsay Pfeiffer | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE UW-Madison student organization CLEAN urges students to sign energy burden petition Campus Leaders for Energy Action Now urge students to sign petition for a rental energy burden disclosure ordinance in Madison. By Lindsay Pfeiffer November 7, 2024 | 3:00am CST Campus Leaders for Energy Action Now (CLEAN), a student organization at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, stood at East Campus Mall Friday to urge students to sign their petition. The petition, which pushes for a rental energy burden disclosure ordinance for the city of Madison, needs at least 2,000 signatures, according to Amanda Sadowski, the community executive member of CLEAN and UW-Madison sophomore. CLEAN aims to ensure UW-Madison Chancellor Jennifer Moonkin sticks to the energy goals she outlined and pushes for additional clean energy projects across campus, Sadowski said. UW-Madison has currently set a goal to have net-zero emissions — when the amount of greenhouse gasses emitted is balanced by the amount removed from the atmosphere — by 2048 and an interim goal of 100% renewable electricity by 2030. A rental energy burden disclosure ordinance requires landlords to divulge information about their building’s energy efficiency to potential tenants, creating pressure for landlords to decrease energy costs for their renters. Energy burden is defined by the U.S. Department of Energy as the percentage of household income spent on energy costs. A household energy burden of 6% or more is considered high. Madison has an average energy burden of 2%, but low-income households can experience burdens up to 9%. Climate change is only exacerbating this issue. Flooding, wildfires and warmer temperatures can damage energy supply, which can disrupt energy transmission into homes. Additionally, a warmer climate means that more energy will be required to keep residents cool, especially in the summer. An increase in energy consumption increases carbon emissions and may create an influx of power loss across the country, which increases costs for Americans. Rental buildings use an average of 20% more energy per square foot than non-rentals. According to the 2022 American Community Survey from the U.S. Census Bureau, 52.5% of people living in Madison are renters. Older homes often have lower energy efficiency due to limited insulation and old appliances, which increases energy costs further. Sadowski told the Cardinal that when energy costs are transparent, prospective renters tend to choose more energy efficient housing. And when renters choose to live in energy efficient housing, greenhouse gas emissions are reduced. Buildings currently release 39% of the world’s carbon emissions, 28% due to the energy used to heat, cool and power them, according to the World Green Building Council. In Madison, buildings are responsible for 64.9% of the city’s total greenhouse gas emissions, with 45.1% coming from commercial buildings and 19.8% from residential buildings. Energy-related greenhouse gas emissions increased by 1.4% in 2017 to the equivalent of 32.5 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide. However, without energy efficiency, emissions would have increased by 12% in 2017. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email A rental energy burden disclosure in Madison would create transparency for renters regarding energy efficiency, which would result in decreased cost and reduced carbon emissions from rental buildings. By signing CLEAN’s petition, students can help advocate for clean energy projects on campus and in Madison. CLEAN is also involved in other clean energy projects on campus. The organization is working toward the addition of electric bikes and an electric lawnmower at the UW-Madison Arboretum and an electric car for University Housing, according to Hannah Stahmann, the campus and systems executive member of CLEAN and UW-Madison senior. The city of Madison is also taking steps to make buildings more energy efficient with programs such as Project Home, which aids in the weatherization of homes on behalf of the state of Wisconsin. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
An officer conducts a traffic stop on October 25th, 2024. Photo by Drew Wesson | The Daily Cardinal News Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter ‘Holy shit,’ I thought. I need to be less curious. By Peter Pricket December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Dear Diary, FIJI — To get the point, I went to a party that University of Wisconsin-Madison Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin attended with the University of Wisconsin Police Department, and to my surprise, I found 90 zyns in one of the officer’s vegan tote bags with some ketamine on the side. I first walked into a medium-sized room with tons of people packed in. I was nestled in the coat closet at first, as guests funneled in with bright smiles and sparkly eyes after they dismantled the pro-Palestine encampment. Now picture this: some Panera, snacks and awkward small talk between university administration and UWPD. I heard some murmurs of “free speech advocacy,” “marketplaces of ideas” and “DEI.” As I was in the coat room I was sifting around. Before you clutch your pearls, let me clarify: I fully support everyone living a life of tranquility as our founding fathers intended. That’s totally chill and I support as an ally, but I just thought it would be a strange place to bring 90 zyns! It was in a vegan tote bag. The ketamine also came as a surprise, as this party was described as a casual get-together. I thought, ‘hey, maybe this one officer is just trying to relax,’ but as I left the coat room, I was in shock. The living room had a nice hummus platter and cheese board with an interesting combination of ketamine next to it! No one noticed me, as at this point people were COOKED on ket within literally five to 10 minutes. While I didn’t stick around long enough to see how the night unfolded (I need to get back to my monkey electro-dick lab), one thing is for certain: this was no ordinary UWPD gathering. It seemed like the start to a freaky Joe Gow episode to be honest. Like, as much as I thought they disliked the guy, they may even be inspired by him! Game recognizes game? But hey, shoutout to Mnookin and crew for keeping things interesting! And if she needs a DJ next time, I’m currently training. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email On Wisconsin, Peter Prickett Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS New York is for the rats
CLEAN community executive Amanda Sadowski (left) and community team member Natalie Bouzas (right) urge students to sign an energy burden disclosure petition on Nov. 1, 2024. Photo by Lindsay Pfeiffer | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE UW-Madison student organization CLEAN urges students to sign energy burden petition Campus Leaders for Energy Action Now urge students to sign petition for a rental energy burden disclosure ordinance in Madison. By Lindsay Pfeiffer November 7, 2024 | 3:00am CST Campus Leaders for Energy Action Now (CLEAN), a student organization at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, stood at East Campus Mall Friday to urge students to sign their petition. The petition, which pushes for a rental energy burden disclosure ordinance for the city of Madison, needs at least 2,000 signatures, according to Amanda Sadowski, the community executive member of CLEAN and UW-Madison sophomore. CLEAN aims to ensure UW-Madison Chancellor Jennifer Moonkin sticks to the energy goals she outlined and pushes for additional clean energy projects across campus, Sadowski said. UW-Madison has currently set a goal to have net-zero emissions — when the amount of greenhouse gasses emitted is balanced by the amount removed from the atmosphere — by 2048 and an interim goal of 100% renewable electricity by 2030. A rental energy burden disclosure ordinance requires landlords to divulge information about their building’s energy efficiency to potential tenants, creating pressure for landlords to decrease energy costs for their renters. Energy burden is defined by the U.S. Department of Energy as the percentage of household income spent on energy costs. A household energy burden of 6% or more is considered high. Madison has an average energy burden of 2%, but low-income households can experience burdens up to 9%. Climate change is only exacerbating this issue. Flooding, wildfires and warmer temperatures can damage energy supply, which can disrupt energy transmission into homes. Additionally, a warmer climate means that more energy will be required to keep residents cool, especially in the summer. An increase in energy consumption increases carbon emissions and may create an influx of power loss across the country, which increases costs for Americans. Rental buildings use an average of 20% more energy per square foot than non-rentals. According to the 2022 American Community Survey from the U.S. Census Bureau, 52.5% of people living in Madison are renters. Older homes often have lower energy efficiency due to limited insulation and old appliances, which increases energy costs further. Sadowski told the Cardinal that when energy costs are transparent, prospective renters tend to choose more energy efficient housing. And when renters choose to live in energy efficient housing, greenhouse gas emissions are reduced. Buildings currently release 39% of the world’s carbon emissions, 28% due to the energy used to heat, cool and power them, according to the World Green Building Council. In Madison, buildings are responsible for 64.9% of the city’s total greenhouse gas emissions, with 45.1% coming from commercial buildings and 19.8% from residential buildings. Energy-related greenhouse gas emissions increased by 1.4% in 2017 to the equivalent of 32.5 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide. However, without energy efficiency, emissions would have increased by 12% in 2017. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email A rental energy burden disclosure in Madison would create transparency for renters regarding energy efficiency, which would result in decreased cost and reduced carbon emissions from rental buildings. By signing CLEAN’s petition, students can help advocate for clean energy projects on campus and in Madison. CLEAN is also involved in other clean energy projects on campus. The organization is working toward the addition of electric bikes and an electric lawnmower at the UW-Madison Arboretum and an electric car for University Housing, according to Hannah Stahmann, the campus and systems executive member of CLEAN and UW-Madison senior. The city of Madison is also taking steps to make buildings more energy efficient with programs such as Project Home, which aids in the weatherization of homes on behalf of the state of Wisconsin. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Darren Lee. ARTS World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit The show featured a lively cast, including University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Izabel Nettey. By Mary Bosch December 5, 2024 | 3:00am CST Capital City Theatre premiered a modern but timeless musical adaptation of the Christmas classic “It’s a Wonderful Life” with music by Artistic Director Andrew Abrams and John Atkins at Mitby Theater from Nov. 22 to Dec. 1. Small modernizations, such as having the traditionally male comedic duo played by women, fleshing out the female characters and taking a less shameful view on suicide, brought the traditional themes to a new audience. “[The audience] sees the movie they love through the lens of where we are today and with more, I think the key word here is acceptance,” Abrams said. “I think everybody today needs more acceptance.” Abrams and I agree — the cast is fantastic. Eddie Egan perfectly embodied leading man George Bailey with a warm timbre and old-timey voice reminiscent of Sinatra. While Abrams said the New York professional carried the show, I think he struggled on some high notes. It was the small town Wisconsinites who stole the show. The dancer with the cleanest lines and sharpest hits had to be University of Wisconsin-Madison freshman Izabel Nettey. From Menomonee Falls, Wis., Nettey landed the role of Ruth, George’s sister-in-law, through a connection with the show’s choreographer Michael Staneck, who also choreographs the UW-Madison Wisconsin Singers. The show taught her an important lesson, especially as a young adult. “This musical has reminded me that I am going the right direction no matter where I go,” Nettey said. Photo by Darren Lee. Jessica Minter played Violet with infectious energy and controlled, methodical movements. In George’s alternate universe, she expertly shifted from a naive girl to a woman using her femininity for her own gain. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The angel Clarence, played by Jason Williams, had fantastic physical comedy and an incredible voice. Every lyric he sang went along with a precise choreographed movement. And when George’s wife Mary sang, I swear I could hear her heart calling out for love. The gentle vibrato in Sarah Ellis’ voice held so much emotion. In one of this adaptation’s major changes, the play sought to flesh out female characters’ stories. “Especially in the case of Mary, she's not just like a pretty face,” Nettey said. “She wants something. She wants a family, a life, and it's not just because she's a woman.” One of the most striking aspects of the show was the set — the larger-than-life buildings rolled on and off-stage by the actors brought the audience into the bustling little town of Bedford Falls. “The town is a character in the show,” Abrams said. “Because in the movie, the care and community are so prominent.” Abrams and John Atkins unknowingly wrote the first song for the musical 20 years ago in New York. Fast forward a decade, they decided to write the full show and eventually brought it to Capital City Theater. Atkins wrote the lyrics while Abrams set it to music. Evan Lang assisted Atkins and Abrams by orchestrating and conducting the band on hand. Atkins changed lines throughout the process, and Lang made changes to scores up until days before they opened, according to Abrams. The entire show was a collaborative effort, meaning the actors and musicians had to be on their game. When all was said and done, Abrams couldn’t believe what they created. “We just wrote a couple songs for this play, and look, it's on a stage with all these people in an orchestra and in lighting,” he said. ”You just kind of can't take it in when you write a new show, and all of a sudden it's on stage, and you're like, wait, we finished that, and people are doing it. It's absolutely nuts. I mean, it's crazy, it's amazing.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Mary BoschMary Bosch is the photo editor for The Daily Cardinal and a first year journalism student. She has covered multiple stories about university sustainability efforts, and has written for state and city news. Follow her on twitter: @Mary_Bosch6 More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Johnathan Dye | The Daily Cardinal VOLLEYBALL Badger volleyball gets swept by No. 2 Nebraska for second time this season The Nebraska Cornhuskers have not swept the Badgers twice in one season since 2012. By Eliana Mann November 27, 2024 | 4:32pm CST Raucous fans packed the Bob Devaney Sports Center in Lincoln, Nebraska Saturday evening to watch the No. 6 University of Wisconsin-Madison volleyball team take on the No. 2 University of Nebraska. The last time these two heavyweight teams competed against each other, Nebraska came away with a dominant three-set win in Madison at the beginning of November. Their second match-up ended the same way, marking the first time since 2012 that Nebraska has swept Wisconsin twice in one season. The Badgers won the first point of the senior night match in Nebraska with a kill by fifth-year outside hitter Sarah Franklin. But the Huskers responded with a seven-point run, and the Badgers were never able to retake the lead. A kill from senior outside hitter Taylor Landfair gave the Huskers set one, 25-21. In similar fashion to the first set, the second set got off to a shaky start for the Badgers due to a six-point Nebraska run. Later in the set, though, Wisconsin strung together four points that included three massive blocks. Fifth-year middle blocker CC Crawford earned a service ace to bring the Badgers within one point of the Huskers. The two teams traded points back and forth from there, but an unfortunate overpass by the Badgers resulted in another Landfair kill to win the set for Nebraska, 25-22. The third set seemed to be going better for the Badgers as they started off with a 3-1 lead. Senior right-side hitter Anna Smrek earned two blocks in the first four Wisconsin points to help build their lead. Although Wisconsin started the set on a 5-2 run, Nebraska quickly responded with a 9-1 run of their own. Nebraska’s energy remained high, feeding off the enthusiasm of their fans. A kill from senior outside hitter Merritt Beason closed out the set 25-17 in favor of the Huskers. Despite losing the match, the Badgers out-blocked the Huskers 11-7. Junior middle blocker Carter Booth earned six of those blocks, while Smrek contributed five. As a team, the Badgers hit just .169 on the match. Franklin led the team with 10 kills, Booth had seven and Smrek had six. Freshman libero Lola Schumacher was still out with an injury, so redshirt freshman Saige Damrow got her third consecutive start at libero. She earned nine digs against the Huskers. Freshman setter Charlie Fuerbringer continued to perform well with 27 assists. With this win, Nebraska ended their regular season at home with an impressive 41-match win streak. Wisconsin has two more matches at home to end the season, and the next one is on Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. against Ohio State at the UW Field House. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Last year's extreme flooding has made sustainable urban planning a high priority in Madison. A focus on stormwater management and better transportation infrastructure will help mitigate some environmental issues. Photo by Creative Commons | The Daily Cardinal OPINION We should appreciate Madison’s climate-conscious urban planning. Sustainability improves quality of life Madison’s focus on transit access, walkability and public spaces shows how urban design can enhance our well-being and the environment. By Hayley Froseth November 21, 2024 | 2:00am CST We all see it: a surge in extreme weather, heatwaves, pollution and a growing danger to clean water. With cities holding 4.4 billion people, more than half of the world’s population, informed urban planning is becoming an increasingly valuable player in the battle against climate change. These dense cities account for over 80% of global GDP, contribute 70% of greenhouse gas emissions and utilize nearly 66% of the world’s total energy, — making sustainable urban development more critical than ever. Though widely used, our college town’s sidewalk networks, nature paths, public parks, bicycle lanes and public transportation are sometimes taken for granted. Many fail to realize that the facets of Madison that make it so livable also make it one of the Midwest’s most sustainable cities, ranking 8th in the nation for green initiatives. In particular, Madison’s public transit infrastructure is a key factor in promoting sustainability. By reducing reliance on cars, it’s easier for people to access downtown, benefiting both the local economy and public safety. Furthering sustainability efforts — and thanks to President Joe Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law — the city of Madison rolled out its ambitious Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) project on Sept. 22. BRT will take the city’s public transport to the next level, spanning 15 miles with 31 stations equipped with student-led solar powered shelters fueling real-time update screens alongside dedicated bus lanes and larger, electric, disability-friendly buses. This ambitious project showcases how urban development can successfully prioritize accessibility, convenience and environmental impact collectively. Madison residents might view these public transit improvements as simply about the element of convenience, of getting places faster and escaping the Arctic winds whipping through campus. However, these efforts are just as much about sustainability. The electric buses reduce emissions, dedicated lanes reduce traffic and solar-powered shelters promote renewable energy. This intentional design goes far beyond providing sheer comfort and ease for locals. At its core, it’s all about reducing the city’s carbon footprint and supporting long-term environmental goals. It recognizes the dire need to build a greener future. But this commitment to environmental awareness extends past public transportation. Known as the unofficial bike capital of the Midwest, Madison is even home to more bikes than cars. With a wide array of bike lanes, biker-friendly traffic rules and community cycling events, Madison’s infrastructure encourages a biking culture promoting physical activity, lowering chronic illness and cutting down individual emissions in the process. As a result, the city has earned the title of a Platinum-level Bicycle Friendly Community from the League of American Bicyclists each year since 2015. On campus, it’s easy to appreciate Madison’s commitment to pedestrians. As class gets out, crowds of people are able to move smoothly along the city’s extensive sidewalks. As the fifth-fittest city in the United States, it’s no surprise that Madison’s ability to maximize walking and minimize driving contributes to lower rates of obesity, asthma, high blood pressure, diabetes or stroke than average. But creating a walkable community goes beyond keeping Madison healthy– it has the power to save our planet. If just 5% of car travel is shifted to walking, 2.83-3.51 gigatons of carbon emissions could be reduced from our atmosphere by 2050, according to projected investments. With the nation’s best urban air quality, Madison has already made a commitment to sustainable urban planning practices. Continued development and expansion of walkable infrastructure creates the opportunity to maintain our city’s status as a leader in environmentally conscious development. Making areas more walkable is more than just increasing activity and ease of navigation– it’s about creating a sense of community. Whether it’s The Terrace or James Madison Park, thoughtful public spaces invite people to explore, relax, stroll and connect, turning neighborhoods into places for interaction and belonging. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Madison’s urban planning is a model of innovation and sustainability, rejecting mundane development in favor of thoughtful, people-centered design. The progressivism of Wisconsin’s capital views local government as a powerful force for good — one that is not only capable of countering profit-driven development but is also expected to actively prioritize the needs of people and the planet over commercial agendas. The reality is, we are running out of time. Now more than ever, University of Wisconsin-Madison students must fiercely protect what defines us: the strength of our community, the health of our planet and the beauty we’re so lucky to share. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Hayley FrosethStaff Writer More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Father Enan Zelinski leads St. Paul’s congregation through worship in a Sunday evening Mass service on October 20, 2024. Photo by Ella Hanley | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS St. Paul’s pastors encourage voting at mass. They call it a Catholic principle As pastors of St. Paul’s, Fathers Eric Sternberg and Enan Zelinski believe their responsibility in the upcoming election is to be sources of information for Catholic students struggling to make a decision this election season. Here’s why. By Ella Hanley October 25, 2024 | 7:00am CDT In the chapel of St. Paul’s Catholic Student Center, light organ music plays as members shuffle in quietly, kneeling and crossing themselves before sitting down. The lights are dimmed as the procession enters the chapel, and the priest, Father Enan Zelinski, enters in long, green robes. Incense pours out of a gold thurible suspended from gold chains and gently swung by a member of the procession. The smoke wafts up through the church while the choir sings praises and the congregation joins, their voices echoing. Zelinski leads the group in song before beginning his message. As pastors of St. Paul’s, Zelinski and Father Eric Sternberg believe their responsibility in the upcoming election is to be sources of information for Catholic students struggling with making a decision. This particular service, the first of two before the election, was used to educate students on core principles from which to guide their ballot decisions. “We don't preach particular people or particular parties,” Zelinski said during this Sunday’s evening service. “We preach eternal principles, principles of the church that we as members asked to put into practice when we go to vote for our elected officials.” Mary Bosch Father Eric Sternberg speaks with The Daily Cardinal in an interview on October 15, 2024. Sternberg told The Daily Cardinal in an interview he considers himself to be “separate” from the secular world, but that’s not to say he isn’t living in it. He finds “great freedom” in remaining nonpartisan, and yet Sternberg underscored the importance of participating in the upcoming election. “I’d argue there are a number of Catholics saying to themselves, ‘maybe I sit this one out,’” Sternberg said. “We’re here to remind you of the principles of which you are to guide yourself with. And then, remind you that you have a duty to vote.” Sternberg believes it is unrealistic to expect to find a political candidate who fully aligns with Catholic principles, and discernment becomes essential when a candidate agrees with ideology on one issue but differs on another. While Catholics may feel backed into a corner this election season, their duty to vote is one rooted in an understanding of the Catholic “common good,” according to Zelinski. Sternberg told the Cardinal that Catholics understand participating in elections to be one of the ways people can seek the common good in society. He also said that Catholics find “no political home” in current politicians or politics. Sternberg advises evaluating candidates based on a hierarchy of core principles, at the root of which is the right of a human person, which he says is “distinctly different” from individual rights. “If we don't understand, as a society, respect for the person and for their inalienable rights, first among them being the right to life, everything else will fail. The first fundamental element of the common good is the respect of the person,” Zelinksi said during the service. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Catholics find themselves at a crossroads when evaluating candidates. For example, Sternberg noted the debate around border control to be particularly split. The church states clearly that lawfully organized states have the right to control who enters and leaves — meaning the state also has the right to return people who entered undocumented. Still, another Catholic virtue is hospitality to strangers, which can lead to tension between upholding laws and responding compassionately to those seeking refuge. “How can I maintain a just approach to immigrants within my society without maintaining integrity of the border?” Sternberg said. The question has been an ongoing debate for years. He asserts that Catholics have a duty to be “reasonable in the choices they make.” Both sides could provide a reasonable justification for supporting their respective positions, he argued. However, Sternberg said some methods used to maintain border integrity, such as camps and mass deportations, are unacceptable. And while Sternberg encourages civil discourse among members of St. Paul’s, he places significant importance on respectful dialogue and encourages his congregation to engage in “vigorous debates” grounded in reason and civility. “The attitude around St. Paul’s, as close as it is to the election, has actually been very peaceful. I've heard lots of students having conversations about ideas, and some of those conversations get very fired up,” Sternberg said. “But we’ve set the tone — If you want to have a screaming, shouting match, go to the bar.” Indeed, the energy inside the church was quiet and respectful as members prayed “that those who govern will defend true justice.” Members of the congregation sat silently after the sermon in a moment of reflection and prayer before resuming worship through song as the organ’s chords blended with the voices of the choir. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Ella HanleyElla Hanley is the associate news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has written breaking, city, state and campus news. Follow her on Twitter at @ellamhanley. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
UW-Madison received a grant that will provide for 205 paid student internships in the next few years, according to a university press release. Photo by Courtesy of UW-Madison | The Daily Cardinal OPINION Don’t let pre-professional culture co-opt your college experience You can’t game a professional landscape that’s constantly changing. You might as well study what you love. By Lauren Stoneman October 10, 2024 | 3:00am CDT Students heading into college in 2024 seem to have a greater sense of the post-graduate landscape than any generation before us. We can scour LinkedIn profiles to discern why that random acquaintance was accepted to Yale Law School. We can go to career fairs and hear what Goldman Sachs and McKinsey are looking to see on a résumé. We can meet with professors and alumni and hear them tell us exactly what we ought to be doing with our fleeting undergraduate years. With this increased sense of perspective comes a feeling of obligation. Students rush to declare “practical” majors in business and computer sciences, swarm to pre-professional organizations that will bolster our future applications, and play fast-and-loose with the term “connection” for the sake of enhancing our LinkedIn pages. UW-Madison saw a 55% increase in computer science students from 2018 to 2022. I’ll hazard a guess that not all of those undergraduates have a genuine passion for large language models. My own academic extracurricular received over 120 applications this fall. I’m confident they don’t all feel an overwhelming urge to roleplay as attorneys and witnesses in their free time (although really, what’s not to love?). They just think competing in undergraduate mock trial is the only viable path to law school. Best case scenario, you are able to find a balance between your obligations and the collegiate activities you actually want to spend time on. Worst case scenario, your obligations start to eat away at you. The latter scenario is much more common. Approximately 43% of undergraduate students nationwide screened positive for symptoms of anxiety, depression or both, according to the 2022 Healthy Minds Survey. While several factors contribute to our nation’s mental health crisis, academic and pre-professional pressures consistently take top billing. It’d be one thing if the pre-professional culture at universities truly proved to be a formulaic, surefire path to career stability after graduation. But as someone now in their fourth year at UW-Madison, I can confirm that the standards and advice we are given by our universities can change with the wind. Take, for example, our own university’s reaction to the introduction of generative AI. I have attended two panels on AI in academia during my time at UW-Madison — one in my sophomore year, and one this fall. In the former, I was told fairly unequivocally to pursue a STEM or business degree to ensure I would have job prospects through the technological revolution. Less than three years later, computer science students are far from guaranteed a prestigious tech job upon their graduation. Jobs in the financial sector are also becoming less viable. Despite students’ efforts, 58% of managers, directors and executives still call the current cohort of graduates unprepared for the workforce. Cut to last week, at the second AI panel. Suddenly, I’m being told to pursue a degree in philosophy so that I can contribute to the budding field of tech ethics. Even in my short time as an undergraduate, I’ve witnessed a complete career advice 180. Of course, it's valuable to hear expert takes on how to navigate through a tricky professional landscape. But you just can’t game a system that’s constantly changing, and that’s what pre-professional culture purports itself to be capable of doing. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email While we all spend our time chasing the one degree, one internship and one recommendation that we’re convinced will lead us to the next, we miss out on what the college experience is really designed to offer: a transient window of time to find out what we enjoy and excel at. Pre-professional campus culture or not, no career is a sure thing. You might as well try to pursue something you actually like. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lauren StonemanLauren Stoneman is an opinions editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Trump’s proposal to eliminate the Department of Education is a dangerous gamble for Wisconsin SAFEwalk hasn’t helped women feel any safer, just uncomfortable Letter to the Editor: Pay the TAs: Unpaid teaching requirements hinder education, research
Photo by Cameron Lane-Flehinger | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison Metropolitan School District referendums pass Two referendums related to Madison Metropolitan School District funding passed Tuesday night. By Joseph Panzer November 6, 2024 | 5:12pm CST Two Madison Metropolitan School District referendums passed with 69.4% and 71.9%, respectively, at 100% of precincts reporting as of Wednesday morning. The first referendum, a $100 million operational referendum paid over four years, will provide for hiring more educators, full-day 4-K programs and mental health initiatives districtwide. The second referendum, a $507 million facility referendum paid over 23 years, will pay for updating elementary and middle schools in the district, according to MMSD’s website. The operational referendum will also allow MMSD to overhaul multilingual education across schools and expand middle school career exploration opportunities through an increase in extracurricular activities and other educational resources. The facility referendum will result in 26 facilities over 60 years old being refurbished with modern heating and plumbing in addition to STEM labs, new libraries and shared spaces. The Wisconsin Policy Forum (WPF) estimated that these two referenda will increase property tax bills by $1,376 for Madison homeowners. Edell Fiedel, the senior director of communications for MMSD, previously told The Daily Cardinal that the district faces a $30.2 million deficit for 2023-25 because the state budget did not keep pace with inflation. A report from WPF also assessed funding concerns for MMSD stemming from the district no longer being able to use revenue from a 2020 referendum or federal COVID-19 relief due to the expiration of the Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) fund. In the past year, 92 different school referenda were on ballots across Wisconsin as a result of what MMSD characterizes as the state’s inability to properly fund school districts through limits on the amount of state aid and local taxes that a district can receive. A press release from the Office of the Mayor said that the referendum will balance the budget until 2030 with the potential for special changes addressing budget gaps to be implemented in 2027. The Cardinal reached out to MMSD. This is a developing story. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Assistant Professor Jean Laurenz plays the trumpet at "Descended" on October 20, 2024 in Madison, Wis. Photo by Ellie Huber | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey A literary giant and Laurenz’ ancestor, Lafcadio Hearn’s compelling insights on the depths of humankind and the paranormal are the inspiration behind the show. By Ellie Huber December 3, 2024 | 2:00am CST University of Wisconsin-Madison assistant professor of trumpet Jean Laurenz created “DESCENDED,” a multimedia show of chamber music, theatrical performance and film that played at the Memorial Union Black Box theater on Oct. 19 and 20. The show aims to take its audience on a spiritual quest to the paranormal and an otherworldly state of mind. “It’s about what happens when we, in our real physical lives, hit that membrane or cross over into that space of the beyond,” Laurenz told The Daily Cardinal. “Of the things that we'll never be able to touch, whether it's the moon or our spiritual ponderings […] We can find beauty within fear.” Laurenz fills the room with vocals and her trumpet and is joined by professional musicians Maria Finkelheier and Greg Jukes. The three co-direct and are featured in this 55-minute show, with visuals by Xuan, the film by Four/Ten Media and music by Finkelmeier. Their work has amassed 15 nominations and awards, including from the Wisconsin Film Festival. Laurenz’ great-great uncle and accomplished writer Lafcadio Hearn is the muse behind “DESCENDED.” A 19th century journalist, wayward traveler, teacher and meta-folk-ghost-story writer, Hearn followed his heart into the unknown. Hearn’s metaphysical literature explores paranormal and dissonant cognitive states, and Laurenz found peace through his story as she navigated the uncertainties of a career in the arts. “I found a lot of hope and inspiration in how one can build a beautiful life that wanders,” Laurenz said. “It gave me so much comfort just to know that I come from somebody like that.” In their post-performance Q&A, the artists shared how liberating they feel letting go of the sheet music and focusing on gestures and the narrative arc. Rather than sticking to a rigid plan, they bring about authentic evocations, connecting to their storytelling on a deeply emotional level. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Haley Henschel | The Daily Cardinal News I graduated from PETA University. Now I electroejaculate monkeys Today I electroejaculated a monkey named Cornelly again. I am at odds with this work. By Peter Pricket November 7, 2024 | 2:00am CST All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Dear diary: Today I electroejaculated a monkey named “Coralilac” again. I am at odds with this work, as I recently graduated from PETA University with a major in biological misinformation and public outrage. When I went to PETA Uni, my professors told me to get upset at anything remotely involved with animals. I would see someone casually putting honey on food, I spring into action. "Oh, you’re just gonna eat that? A baby bee probably died for your fucking honey, you know. Had its whole home destroyed because some farmer thought profit and capitalistic yellow sauce was more important than a bee’s dwelling place. But sure… enjoy your honey." But I ended up in a more unique field now, and it goes against everything I stand for like bees’ rights. While I write this, I am currently in a lab coat at a monkey lab electroejaculating monkey penises for research purposes. The scientists around me try to calm me down and tell me this is a normal process to collect semen for genetic, breeding and reproductive disease research, but I genuinely have to take Xanax before sending electrodes to a monkey’s penis by inserting a probe into their rectum. I do this everyday, five days a week for 40 hours. It is absolutely draining and sinister work. It smells like ass inside the lab, the monkeys including “Coralilac” are too excited about this shit. While I question my morals through attending mass every Sunday, the monkeys are thrilled. This isn’t what I graduated from PETA University for. Somewhere, my professors are probably shaming me. I mean maybe they could be proud. I am making the monkeys happy to some degree, but this is straight-up animal abuse. They should be outside roaming and getting to live without electric shock waves to their dicks while I get paid minimum wage. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Catch me feds! I ballot stuffed 450 times in the 2024 election I’m going to commit $270 worth of property damage to the university An ode to freedom (more lanes)
Photo courtesy of Peter Kiessewalter. ARTS Kiesewalter and La Grange’s The Moth Project takes flight in Madison The Moth Project is an immersive show about moths that blends science, music and art into a hopeful allusion of the human experience. By Sonia Bendre November 7, 2024 | 4:00am CST It’s easy to think of the moth as the boring, less colorful relative of the butterfly. But The Moth Project explores the forgotten insect with new levels of music and videography. The Moth Project began on Oct. 24 at the Overture Center with a white background and two performers, Peter Kiesewalter, dressed in white with dark-shaded, white-rimmed sunglasses, and his partner Whitney La Grange. Kiesewalter expressed gratitude for being able to perform at the Overture Center and poked at the similarities between the Midwest and Ottawa, Canada, where The Moth Project was conceived — the abundance of natural beauty, the weather and even some of the same moth species. Then, the lights dimmed. Kiesewalter walked to the electric piano as La Grange got into position on the violin. The first song came to life on the screen with a visual of the spinning planet Earth: “Welcome to My Haus.” The title of the song hints at Kiesewalter’s German heritage and the tone of the show, which is equal parts playful and personal. Moths transitioned from nocturnal insect to lifestyle quickly for Kiesewalter when his brother, an interpretive naturalist, started collecting photographs of them during pandemic season in Canada. Kiesewatler proudly displayed his collection of moth photographs. Among his favorites is the luna moth, a green beauty with eyespots like half-moons on its wings, a type of moth that emerges from its cocoon with vestigial mouthparts and thus only days or hours to live. And what they do with that time, mostly, is have sex. The emergence and subsequent activities of the moth inspire two songs. The first is “Emergence,” a poppy, upbeat track with a motif reminiscent of “Flight of the Bumblebee” in the twenty-first century. Kiesewalter powered on the piano and vocals (hitting some impressive high notes), and La Grange played the difficult song on the violin with impressive consistency. The second song is “Pheromones,” a slow love song which starts with Kiesewalter crooning into a vocoder and features videos of intimate moth activities. Throughout the show, the lyrics continually surprised the audience. I especially enjoyed listening to “Death,” a mashup of KISS’s “Beth,” a Virginia Woolf essay about the death of a moth and Mozart’s “The Magic Flute.” Kiesewalter’s creativity came from an online thesaurus, painstaking hours of songwriting and science tips from his brother. Sometimes humorous and other times deeply personal, The Moth Project is fresh, experimental and most of all, fun. With the show, Kiesewalter aimed to raise viewers’ awareness about the natural world. It is a significant tonal shift from most media in the environmentalism movement, which tends to be negative. The Moth Project, on the other hand, celebrates the natural world. I left wanting to learn more about moths, and I had a more concrete idea of who I would be protecting by living sustainably. Kiesewater said botanist Robin Wall Kimmerer inspired parts of the show. Her voice is featured in the song “Reciprocity,” reading a chapter of her book “Braiding Sweetgrass” while La Grange plays a beautiful rendition of “Clair de Lune” by Claude Debussy. Like “Braiding Sweetgrass,” The Moth Project has a more positive and hopeful mood than a plain call-to-action. As Kimmerer tries to inject emotionality and a sense of being into her gardens, Kiesewalter tells not just the facts but the story of the moth, whether it is just emerging from a cocoon, traveling great distances or immolating itself on a flame, allowing people to see themselves in the creatures. During the show, as expected, Kiesewalter spent a lot of time talking about moths. But he also found a way to connect their journeys to the human condition. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email For example, the moth’s migration was framed as an allegory for Kiesewalter’s parents’ immigration from Germany to Canada in the 1950s. The song “Emergence,” Kiesewalter said, alludes to the experience of coming out. The show ended with a cover of Joni Mitchell’s “The Case of You” set to pictures of Kiesewalter’s family. From zydeco to classical to pop, the protean music reflected the diversity of moth species in the show’s videography. Peter Kiesewalter played an electric piano and sang, while La Grange, a Juilliard-trained violinist, played hauntingly beautiful melodies. Kiesewalter’s subject matter was similarly diverse, musing about moths’ motivations to kill themselves over flames in “Immolation,” the process of exiting the cocoon in “Emergence” and comparing their journeys to human migration in “Migration.” The song and videography of “Flight” was a standout — a series of high-res, slow-motion videos of moths jumping into the air with their wings fanning out behind them. If scientists are looking for a way to make people pay attention to nature again, The Moth Project is doing the right work. It is the antithesis of a dry list of facts or a compilation of depressing statistics. It is a performance with a human dimension, one full of excitement, contemplation and joy. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Designed by Wannapik LIFE & STYLE Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process Success isn't a one-size-fits all. In a world obsessed with achievement, Daily Cardinal editor Alexandra Malatesta reflects on her journey to uncover what truly matters. By Alexandra Malatesta December 5, 2024 | 2:00am CST Success: the word that haunts every walk of life. But what does it really mean? Does “being successful” mean graduating from Harvard University, growing up wealthy and owning a house in the Hamptons? Maybe. But in my wise 20 years of life, I’ve discovered that success has a different meaning to everyone. I remember the days when success wasn’t even a thought in my mind. I’d come home from school, grab whatever snack I could find in the cupboard and relax, with no responsibilities except for making my bed in the morning. Then, as soon as I hit 18, life became real. I went to college in a city I wasn’t sure of but adapted to the best of my ability. Slowly, the “reality of adulthood” came in doses. Suddenly, I had to think about money, where I was living and basic daily tasks like eating healthy and staying active — a balance I’m still figuring out. Now, as I navigate the second phase of college, I realized that this scary word, “success,” had started following me around. A mood killer, if you will. Sophomore year was especially intimidating. Either people had amazing internships or none at all. I found myself overwhelmed, people I’d assumed were coasting somehow had everything figured out. Meanwhile, I had no idea what I wanted to do post-grad or what direction I wanted to take my career. At 19, how was I supposed to know? Maybe some people do, but for me, my many interests made it impossible to choose a single path. So, I did what any confused college student would do: I applied to every internship that caught my eye. Cutting to the chase, I landed an internship that was a goal of mine, the “Yale” of internships, as some might say. It was a great experience, and I learned more about myself than I ever imagined. But even with such a coveted opportunity, I found myself constantly looking for the next best thing. I couldn’t shake the feeling that I could do more. “How else can I feel ahead? How else can I succeed?” The feeling of success continued to haunt me. Over the past few months since that internship, I’ve done a lot of self-reflection. I’ve always felt a little different from my peers, prioritizing things that most 20-year-olds might not. It’s not a cry for pity; it’s just given me time to understand why this thought of success has been bothering me. I used to constantly compare myself to others until I came to an important realization: everyone views success differently. I had to decide what success means to me and what’s most important for my life. For me, success boils down to three things: Family: prioritizing my current family and envisioning the future one I hope to build. A goal of mine is to be a mom one day. Health: remaining grateful for my health and using the resources I have to take care of myself. As long as I treat my body with care, I’ll be able to have as many life experiences as possible. Community: surrounding myself with people who bring me joy. I’m incredibly thankful for the friendships that make life meaningful. The more I think about it, the more I realize that being overwhelmed by the idea of success is a waste of time. Success will come, as long as you believe in it and trust the process. I believe my career will eventually fall into place, and I’ll be proud of my accomplishments. But true success — real fulfillment — looks different for everyone. It’s easy to get caught up in the little things, but defining success for yourself early on can lead you toward internal peace and happiness much faster than you think. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year Post-election slump: Finding motivation in a time of uncertainty
Jordan Ellenberg Courtesy of Davey Hubay SCIENCE Science Sit-Down: Jordan Ellenberg talks AI research, student engagement University of Wisconsin-Madison math professor Jordan Ellenberg sits down with The Daily Cardinal to discuss his latest AI research and writing and student work. By Sonia Bendre September 12, 2024 | 3:00am CDT University of Wisconsin-Madison math professor Jordan Ellenberg eats pizza weekly with other Discovery Fellows and department professors, stimulating discussion about new topics in science. Most recently, Ellenberg has taken an interest in artificial intelligence and spent time working on a project with Google Deepmind to brainstorm different uses for the tool in the mathematical discipline. “They had a very wonderful idea of using a large language model to generate chunks of code that are supposed to sort of help you with a certain mathematical problem,” Ellenberg told The Daily Cardinal. “It's pretty fun to read codes in a machine mode and try to learn stuff.” After graduating with a Ph.D. in math from Harvard University in 1998, Ellenberg took a position as a postdoctoral student at the Simon Laufer Mathematical Sciences Institute. He taught at Princeton University for eight years before becoming an Assistant Professor at UW-Madison, where he remains a professor today. Ellenberg’s research background in number theory, geometry Ellenberg primarily studies number theory and algebraic geometry, both areas within the greater field of pure mathematics. He now holds the positions of John D. MacArthur Professor and Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professor at the UW-Madison, as well as of a Cornell A.D. White Professor at Large. The John D. MacArthur professorship recognizes distinguished scholars in research, the Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professorship recognizes exceptional scholarship as well as teaching and service and the Cornell A.D. White Professorship is considered one of the most prestigious distinctions in an academic’s career. “A lot of my research is in very traditional, very classical areas of number theory… It's sort of saying, here's an equation. Does it have solutions? Can you find whole numbers that solve it?” Ellenberg said. “That's a very, very old kind of question. We still basically don't know anything about it. I mean, we had a few thousand years to work on it, and we're making some progress.” For Ellenberg, teaching is a way to tell stories about math. “Every single thing we use was invented by some person, for some reason, for some problem they were trying to do. I find it really useful to bring that into the classroom,” Ellenberg said. Ellenberg has also published three books, including a novel called “The Grasshopper King.” His books “How Not to Be Wrong” and “Shape” combine statistical data and mathematics with storytelling techniques. Ellenberg also writes a blog, called Quomodocumque. “I have a long-term goal of trying to figure out how to teach and how to talk about this process of writing about science, writing about math. A lot of people do it, and there's clearly a demand, but hardly anyone's trained in it. There's no process to writing about data,” Ellenberg said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Among other classes, Ellenberg teaches a first-year interest group called “Writing and Data,” which focuses on teaching students to synthesize data into news and scientific writing. By the end of the first-year interest group, students are expected to create a magazine-style piece. His goal: talk to and support non-scientists. “There’s a way that you learn in high school to write an academic paper, and, in your classes here, when you write, there's a certain academic style…but that's not really the way we explain stuff to the general public. And for scientists who are working, there's a way to write a journal article, but it's also its own separate style,” he said. ‘The students here are really eager to learn’ Ellenberg shared his thoughts on one of the more controversial areas of math curriculum education: the Common Core, a set of standards for English and mathematics education for kindergarten through high school students. Ellenberg, an advocate of the curriculum, has written extensively on the Common Core and K-12 education in periodicals like The New York Times and The Washington Post. “I basically think it's like a very solid set of goals. It's pretty ambitious, and it sets pretty high standards,” Ellenberg said. “One thing that it really centers, and I think is very right, is that the ability to do arithmetic manipulations and then form algebraic manipulations is absolutely critical, and kids have to not just sort of know how to do those things, but really master those things.” Ellenberg also shared his opinion on online mathematics education — a format that had many downsides, but some surprising innovations, he said. While the general format led to a lack of student attention, he said, the chat sidebar allowed for more student participation throughout lectures, letting students offer input without interrupting the teacher or the flow of the classroom. Ellenberg looks forward to beginning the new semester, where he will be teaching “Writing and Data,” a seminar in number theory, and a section of a course called “Reading and Research.” “This is a really fun place to teach. The students here are really eager to learn, and it's just always a fun classroom,” Ellenberg said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Finnegan Ricco | The Daily Cardinal CAMPUS NEWS Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget The Student Services Finance Committee recommended an increase in student segregated fees after request from University Health Services to prevent staffing cuts, increase patient visits. By Elijah Pines December 10, 2024 | 4:32pm CST The University of Wisconsin-Madison’s Student Services Finance Committee (SSFC) recommended a $27 increase in student tuition Monday night in order for University Health Services (UHS) to maintain its current services and prevent staffing cuts. The SSFC is an Associated Students of Madison (ASM) committee of students in charge of allocating student segregated fees, a part of tuition that funds certain student services like bus passes and the Wisconsin Union. UHS asked the SSFC for a 10% increase to its fee, which currently costs students $277 per semester. UHS intentionally spent most of its cash reserves in the past several years, according to Jake Baggott, the executive director of UHS. The fee will help fill 17 staff vacancies within UHS and prevent more from leaving. “I feel like we have a clear direction to move forward,” Baggott told The Daily Cardinal Monday. UHS staff are currently “feeling extraordinary levels of stress” trying to see as many students as possible, Baggott said. The 17 vacancies are currently being recruited for and will help alleviate UHS patient load as well as increase patient visits by 17,000 visits, according to UHS. “I assure you, we will lose staff if we don't fill these positions,” Baggott told the committee. The recommendation includes wording to prevent fee increases above 4% per year for the next five years, in line with a UHS internal financial forecast of predicted expenses. However, if the forecast is inaccurate and UHS expenses are larger than predicted, fees may increase above 4%. SSFC initially recommended not increasing segregated fees and for UHS to implement cost saving measures. The committee believes UHS has an “outsized burden” on the segregated fee, taking up 35% of the total segregated fee, according to SSFC Chair Elijah Lin. Still, Baggott argued the increased fee wasn’t intended to expand UHS operations but to prevent staffing loss. Baggott also said UHS was granted a 10% segregated fee increase last year but only implemented a 5% increase. Lin told the Cardinal SSFC’s original recommendation was made before they were informed of what no increase in segregated fees would entail. The committee received an email stating that UHS would be prevented from hiring certain positions in the spring. SSFC also asked UHS to make a committee to look at cost-cutting measures and revenue generation. Baggott told the committee UHS was already planning on creating one in the spring. Lin said the committee came to agree with the 10% increase to keep those positions filled, with the clauses to cap further increases, and that SSFC is “making sure that we stay within fiscal responsibility for the coming years.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email SSFC’s recommendations will be sent to Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin for her approval, and if accepted, added to next year’s fiscal budget. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Shane Fruchterman | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS ‘Hide your moms, not your ballots’: Yung Gravy to visit Madison Wednesday to encourage early voting The rapper and UW-Madison alum is teaming up with event company Daybreaker to encourage voter participation on campus ahead of the election. By Jake Piper October 22, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Rapper Yung Gravy will return to Madison on Oct. 23 as part of a nationwide “Party to the Polls” tour, encouraging voter participation ahead of the election. The rapper will perform, lead a parade to Memorial Union and host a meet and greet. The “Party to the Polls Purple Tour” is a nationwide, nonpartisan event sponsored by Daybreaker that aims to encourage voter participation in the upcoming election through “dance parties celebrating democracy.” Yung Gravy will perform at Liquid Madison from noon to 1 p.m. on Wednesday. At 1 p.m. Gravy and a brass band will lead a parade of voters to Memorial Union’s early voting polls. Free Ian’s Pizza and Paul’s Pel’meni will be served for lunch and voters will be met with both “poll” and “pole” dancers on arrival. Afterward, Gravy will host a meet and greet for voters on the library mall side of Memorial Union. “This is the purple tour — whether you are blue or red, we welcome all to collectively dance with Yung Gravy and follow him in a musical procession to the polls,” event coordinator and Co-Founder of Daybreaker Eli Clark-Davis told The Daily Cardinal. The event will be hosted by District 2 Ald. Juliana Bennett and District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan. “The goal of this event is to make voting easy and fun for everyone,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal. Yung Gravy most recently performed in Madison at the 2022 Taste of Madison festival. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Aspen trees eaten leafless by spongy moth caterpillars on June 18, 2021. Photo courtesy of Mark Zierden/UW-Madison. SCIENCE Invasive spongy moths strip aspen tree foliage, damage a native species, UW-Madison researcher says Rick Lindroth at the University of Wisconsin-Madison found that spongy moth caterpillars strip aspen tree foliage, increasing tree defenses and causing harm to a native species. By Lindsay Pfeiffer September 12, 2024 | 5:00am CDT Invasive spongy moths are defoliating aspen trees and making their leaves regrow with high levels of toxins, harming a native insect, according to recent research from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. In 2021, Rick Lindroth, UW-Madison entomology professor emeritus, began noticing this effect. After his research group originally planted aspen trees in 2010 to conduct other experiments on the trees at the Arlington Agricultural Research Station, a spongy moth outbreak occurred following their absence during COVID-19 in 2020. The research team — made up of Lindroth, visiting scientist Patricia Fernandez, former graduate student Clay Morrow and post-doctorate Mark Zierden — had to take a different route according to Lindroth. “When we walked into the aspen stand in spring 2021, we realized there were thousands of egg masses — each egg mass contains 400 to 600 larva — and we were not anticipating that. I knew right then that we were doomed to have a major defoliating outbreak of spongy moths,” Lindroth told The Daily Cardinal. Spongy moths, which arrived in North America from Europe in 1869, only entered Wisconsin in the early 2000s, according to Lindroth. They feed on more than 300 species of trees and can defoliate trees for miles, which can harm entire forests, he said. When the outbreak occurred on aspen trees at the Arlington Agricultural Research Station, the researchers instead decided to study the consequences of spongy moth defoliation on the native polyphemus silk moth, the second-largest moth in North America. “What we were looking at is the legacy effect of the defoliation that carried on in terms of food quality for the native polyphemus moth,” Lindroth said. Although these two species don’t directly interact, both moths feed on aspen trees at different times of the year. “Spongy moths feed early in the season and then they’re done. Polyphemus moths feed mid- to late summer so anything the spongy moths do to alter food quality will impact the polyphemus moth,” Lindroth said.. Aspen trees produce salicylate-like compounds, which can be highly toxic at high levels, according to Lindroth. The compounds are similar to aspirin as they are made up of a salicin derivative and are known as salicinoids, he noted. “A spongy moth caterpillar feeding on a tree with normal levels of these salicinoids would consume, in human terms, 5-7 pounds of aspirin in a day. Imagine what that would do to your gut,” Lindroth said. When the spongy moth eats aspen leaves in the spring, the aspen trees respond by reflushing a new set of leaves. But these leaves have eight times the levels of salicinoid defenses that they previously had, according to Lindroth. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email And although spongy moths and polyphemus moths have both adapted to eat these toxins at normal levels, when aspen trees increase their defenses following the spongy moth’s feeding season, it overwhelms polyphemus caterpillars’ ability to detoxify them, Lindroth said. This can result in lesions in the gut, septicemia, hemorrhaging and death, he said. Spongy moth outbreaks don’t only negatively affect the polyphemus moth. They also degrade aspen trees. Aspen trees that have lost their leaves even once have a dramatic reduction in growth for the year, according to Lindroth. At the Arlington plot, he said their aspen trees were more susceptible to disease and drought years later, causing some to die. Additionally, Lindroth told the Cardinal aspens are the most widely distributed tree species in North America and therefore aid a great deal in carbon sequestration, the process of capturing carbon dioxide from the air, which helps combat climate change. Other research done by Lindroth has shown that when trees photosynthesize, they can use the energy produced to either grow or make defense compounds. Growth creates carbon sequestration, he said. “I think we can make the argument that invasive species like spongy moths can negatively affect the capacity of aspen forest to sequester carbon by removing leaves so the trees aren’t photosynthesizing, and when the leaves reflush, they’re busy making defense compounds rather than growing,” Lindroth said. Lindroth underscored that there is currently no experimental evidence for this, but it has potential to be a serious implication for the spongy moth outbreaks. To combat this, the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection is part of a federal “Slow the Spread” program that aims to prevent spongy moths from traveling westward and to aid in treatment of isolated outbreaks. Treatments include aerially spraying a bacterial insecticide or spraying wax droplets containing pheromone to stop male spongy moths from finding females. Although some insecticide sprays may be able to treat larger outbreaks, Lindroth said that once they’ve been established in an area, there’s not much that can be done to contain the outbreak completely. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Schwartz’s no-hitter sets tone for dominant weekend in West Lafayette Badger softball traveled to West Lafayette and took care of the Boilermakers with ease. By Justin Alpert April 10, 2023 | 11:00am CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team (20-10, 7-2) outclassed the Purdue Boilermakers (17-22, 2-9) in a three-game sweep this weekend. Wisconsin’s pitching staff, highlighted by Maddie Schwartz’s Friday no-hitter, came one out from a weekend-long shutout. That, combined with 19 total runs from the offense, helped the Badgers overpower Purdue and keep pace in the Big Ten standings. Friday | 7-0 W Schwartz was perfect through five innings while Wisconsin tried to figure out Boilermaker starter Madi Elish, who entered with a pedestrian 3.86 ERA. The Badgers managed just one hit and two baserunners in the first four frames but finally got to Elish (L, 6-2) in the fifth. Rylie Crane reached on an error before Peyton Bannon doubled, then another infield miscue allowed both to score. Molly Schlosser made it 4-0 with a two-run triple and scored on Katie Keller’s sacrifice fly. Kayla Konwent extended the lead with a two-run home run in the seventh inning. With Schwartz in the circle, though, one run would’ve been plenty for Wisconsin, let alone seven. The only blemishes on Schwartz’s statline were a sixth-inning walk and a seventh-inning baserunner, who reached on Crane’s error. Schwartz (W, 6-7) hurled the 11th no-hitter in program history with a remarkably efficient performance, never throwing more than 14 pitches in an inning. She struck out only three, relying instead on the pitch-to-contact approach which has made her a force during her Wisconsin career. After adjusting to a lighter workload and more relief appearances in 2023 while Paytn Monticelli, Gabi Salo and Tessa Magnanimo pitched — and excelled — more regularly, Schwartz proved her effectiveness hasn’t waned. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Saturday | 7-0 W The Badgers carried the momentum into Game 2 of the series with a pair of first-inning runs. Keller’s speed — and value as a leadoff hitter — was on full display as she walked, advanced to third on Konwent’s single and scored on Brooke Kuffel’s sacrifice fly. The pop to right appeared too shallow for Keller to score, but she got a great jump and narrowly avoided the tag at home. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Unlike Friday’s, this 7-0 victory involved some stress for Magnanimo and Wisconsin. Two singles and a walk loaded the bases for Purdue in the first inning, but Magnanimo got a swinging strikeout to escape the jam. The Boilermakers got a runner in scoring position in the second and fifth innings, too, ultimately leaving both stranded. Christaana Angelopulos pulled a pitch to right-center for her second home run in as many weekends. Konwent didn’t record an out all afternoon, going 2-for-2 with two singles, a pair of walks and a run. Magnanimo (W, 4-1) threw her third complete-game victory in her last four outings, dating back to March 31. She tallied six strikeouts in this shutout, yielding six hits and two walks. A 2.87 ERA through 39 innings is a testament to Magnanimo’s success in 2023, and that the mark is fourth among Badger pitchers confirms how deep and dominant Wisconsin’s staff is. It’s often a mystery who will start each game, but it hasn’t mattered much. Sunday | 5-1 W Schwartz (W, 7-7) was nearly as good in the series finale as she was Friday. She allowed three hits in 6.1 shutout frames but did struggle with control at times, throwing only 36 of 61 pitches for strikes and hitting three batters. Her afternoon actually included two appearances. Salo entered with a 5-0 lead to begin the seventh, and she allowed a run on three hits while recording two outs. Schwartz then returned to the circle and induced a groundout to end the game — the right-hander has been a starter and reliever during her illustrious career, but doing both in one game was a new experience. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Wisconsin’s offense, meanwhile, applied pressure throughout the Sunday afternoon victory. Kuffel got the scoring started with a first-inning RBI single. The Badgers scored twice in the second on singles by Konwent and Keller, then again in the third and fourth innings. Once again, the lineup provided ample run support for Wisconsin’s stingy pitching staff. A conference contender The 13.1 innings of scoreless work lowered Schwartz’s ERA to an even 2.00 and her WHIP to 1.00. Schwartz has thrown 19 consecutive innings versus conference opponents without allowing an earned run and now boasts a 1.12 ERA in 25 innings of Big Ten play. Magnanimo leads the staff with 26.2 Big Ten innings. Salo and Monticelli, interestingly, have only pitched seven and 3.1 innings, respectively, since the conference schedule began. The latter’s most recent appearance came March 24 at Michigan State — it’s unclear whether there’s a clear reason for Monticelli’s absence, or if she’s just taking a backseat role to Wisconsin’s more experienced arms. Wisconsin’s excellent pitching within the conference has been encouraging, although it’s worth noting the opponents thus far — Michigan State, Illinois and Purdue — are three of the worst Big Ten teams. Schwartz and co. figure to regress between now and the Big Ten Tournament as the competition heightens. Taylor Wolfram Wisconsin softball plays a doubleheader against Illinois at the Goodman Softball Diamond on April 2, 2023 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Konwent’s bat has been as dependable as any during her five-year career, and 2023 is no exception. A six-hit weekend at Purdue boosted her slash line to .373/.523/.723, and she’s on pace for 12 regular-season home runs after hitting 10 last year. Skylar Sirdashney has slumped badly after her early-season breakout. The third baseman has dropped in the lineup during a 1-for-25 stretch dating back to March 24. Sirdashney’s average has dropped from .328 to .247 in the eight-game span, but she’ll likely remain in the lineup for the foreseeable future. A 7-2 conference record places Wisconsin behind only Northwestern (9-1) and Indiana (9-2) in the Big Ten. With Northwestern coming to town for three games this weekend, the Badgers can confirm their status as one of the conference’s top teams. The Wildcats have been excellent in 2023, but Wisconsin’s consistent mix of dominant pitching and offensive production should make for a highly competitive series. First, however, the Badgers host DePaul on Tuesday and St. Thomas for a Wednesday double-header. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Shane Fruchterman | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS ‘Hide your moms, not your ballots’: Yung Gravy to visit Madison Wednesday to encourage early voting The rapper and UW-Madison alum is teaming up with event company Daybreaker to encourage voter participation on campus ahead of the election. By Jake Piper October 22, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Rapper Yung Gravy will return to Madison on Oct. 23 as part of a nationwide “Party to the Polls” tour, encouraging voter participation ahead of the election. The rapper will perform, lead a parade to Memorial Union and host a meet and greet. The “Party to the Polls Purple Tour” is a nationwide, nonpartisan event sponsored by Daybreaker that aims to encourage voter participation in the upcoming election through “dance parties celebrating democracy.” Yung Gravy will perform at Liquid Madison from noon to 1 p.m. on Wednesday. At 1 p.m. Gravy and a brass band will lead a parade of voters to Memorial Union’s early voting polls. Free Ian’s Pizza and Paul’s Pel’meni will be served for lunch and voters will be met with both “poll” and “pole” dancers on arrival. Afterward, Gravy will host a meet and greet for voters on the library mall side of Memorial Union. “This is the purple tour — whether you are blue or red, we welcome all to collectively dance with Yung Gravy and follow him in a musical procession to the polls,” event coordinator and Co-Founder of Daybreaker Eli Clark-Davis told The Daily Cardinal. The event will be hosted by District 2 Ald. Juliana Bennett and District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan. “The goal of this event is to make voting easy and fun for everyone,” Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal. Yung Gravy most recently performed in Madison at the 2022 Taste of Madison festival. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Photo by Cameron Lane-Flehinger | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison Metropolitan School District referendums pass Two referendums related to Madison Metropolitan School District funding passed Tuesday night. By Joseph Panzer November 6, 2024 | 5:12pm CST Two Madison Metropolitan School District referendums passed with 69.4% and 71.9%, respectively, at 100% of precincts reporting as of Wednesday morning. The first referendum, a $100 million operational referendum paid over four years, will provide for hiring more educators, full-day 4-K programs and mental health initiatives districtwide. The second referendum, a $507 million facility referendum paid over 23 years, will pay for updating elementary and middle schools in the district, according to MMSD’s website. The operational referendum will also allow MMSD to overhaul multilingual education across schools and expand middle school career exploration opportunities through an increase in extracurricular activities and other educational resources. The facility referendum will result in 26 facilities over 60 years old being refurbished with modern heating and plumbing in addition to STEM labs, new libraries and shared spaces. The Wisconsin Policy Forum (WPF) estimated that these two referenda will increase property tax bills by $1,376 for Madison homeowners. Edell Fiedel, the senior director of communications for MMSD, previously told The Daily Cardinal that the district faces a $30.2 million deficit for 2023-25 because the state budget did not keep pace with inflation. A report from WPF also assessed funding concerns for MMSD stemming from the district no longer being able to use revenue from a 2020 referendum or federal COVID-19 relief due to the expiration of the Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) fund. In the past year, 92 different school referenda were on ballots across Wisconsin as a result of what MMSD characterizes as the state’s inability to properly fund school districts through limits on the amount of state aid and local taxes that a district can receive. A press release from the Office of the Mayor said that the referendum will balance the budget until 2030 with the potential for special changes addressing budget gaps to be implemented in 2027. The Cardinal reached out to MMSD. This is a developing story. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Zoe Kukla | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE Overconsumption core: How social media fuels materialism in hidden ways By Olivia Ruetten September 5, 2024 | 2:00am CDT While scrolling on social media, you’ve probably come across a video on “overconsumption” referring to how people buy and consume goods. If you look around your own room, how many items have you purchased because someone online made it seem like it was necessary, especially as a status symbol? Originally part of the economic lexicon, overconsumption is defined as the high rate at which people consume resources, such as online products that are commonly cheap and poorly made. This rate is unsustainable, meaning what is being used to produce the goods purchased cannot be easily replenished. In short, we buy so much and so often that the supply chain has a hard time keeping up with our purchasing habits in a sustainable way for the environment. Producing the amount of products necessary to suit the demand of consumers has come with extreme consequences. Companies tend to produce their goods overseas, and while this can make production less expensive and more efficient, labor regulations are often far too lax. It’s not uncommon for manufacturers overseas to employ children for cheap and plentiful labor. Children work long hours in unsanitary and unsafe work environments to meet the soaring demand of products. Products are sold to customers not by the company, but by its appeal as a symbol of social acceptance. To fit in, customers feel they have no choice but to buy the product, even if deep down they know they do not need it. This is what is referred to online as “overconsumption core.” The damage of overconsumption is its lack of sustainability. Just because one can purchase what they want, whenever they want, that doesn’t make it environmentally sustainable or ethical. In addition to the harm caused to the environment, many young social media users have become susceptible to online marketing that seeks to convince them owning products that are popular online mark status and popularity, especially in school. One elementary schooler reported being bullied in school after they asked for the $40 Stanley tumbler for Christmas and instead got a knockoff product. They said classmates had teased them for not having a “real” Stanley. Younger generations have felt the effects of products becoming status symbols firsthand, proving how the consequences of overconsumption can negatively affect the mental health of social media users, especially children. Many were fed up with influencers touting collections of products like Stanley tumblers, Amazon “dupes” and “must-have” products. Their solution was to make videos where they show viral online products and explain why their viewers should not purchase it. This is also called “de-influencing.” It encourages customers not to buy more, but to be flexible with the products they already possess. Overconsumption is just one of the ways that social media fuels consumerism. Content creators make money off products they advertise, like Stanley tumblers or Amazon partnerships. These are not “must-haves,” they’re fads that will pass in a few months. It’s up to us, the consumers, to choose whether or not we fall for the ruse of overconsumption. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Photo courtesy of StageQ. ARTS ‘Angry Fags’ gives a hilarious look into the minds of terrorists StageQ’s adaptation of the political comedy offers a cynical view of queerness, electoral politics and murder. By Oliver Gerharz November 14, 2024 | 3:00am CST “Angry Fags” is a campy play full of oddball characters and dialogue that feels human yet hilarious. It’s also about queer sorrow and rage inspired by homophobia and is a dialogue between ideas on how to resist bigotry. "Angry Fags," running at the Bartell Theatre from Nov. 1-16, was put on by StageQ, a Madison organization dedicated to theater covering LGBTQ+ topics. At the start of "Angry Fags," the audience is introduced to Bennet Riggs (Jonah Hirst) and Thomas “Coop” Cooper (Jack Garton) as they share a bottle of wine, joke about their work crushes and use explosives to assassinate a political opponent. After that flash-forward, the first act of the 120-minute play introduces Bennet as a communications staffer on the team of Georgia State Sen. Alison Haines (Molly Maslin). Haines is up for re-election, an incumbent accused of prioritizing her own agenda as a lesbian instead of the needs of the people. On top of political conflict, "Angry Fags" follows a romance between Bennet and Adam (Matt Reines), the chief of staff on Haines’ campaign. Bennet and Adam’s relationship is supported by their coworker Kimberly (Vi Williams) — that is to say, as a married straight woman, she thinks it's hot that two guys are kissing. Kimberly is probably the funniest part of this play, at one point giving Bennet a brief list of gay guys she thinks he should hook up with “for her.” After a day on the job, Bennet returns home and exchanges some very real-feeling banter with his roommate Cooper. Cooper tells Bennet about running into Bennet’s ex-boyfriend Sammy the night before, and the roommates mock Sammy for going home with an unattractive and straight-looking man that night. Then Cooper gets a call that Sammy has been found badly beaten — that man Sammy “went home with” is the prime suspect. The reality shift that happens at this moment is what “Angry Fags” is best at. From this point on, suspense and narrative discomfort slowly build as comedy and tragedy sit side by side and eventually blur together. While his boss sticks to a moderate and politically-conscious response to the attack, Bennet is enraged. He laments the homophobes that perpetuate these attacks don’t fear any repercussions from the gay community. Bennet and Cooper discuss how someone needs to strike fear into their hearts so that they can “protect the tribe” from these attacks. Cooper becomes this protector when he sees Sammy’s attacker outside of a Home Depot and murders him, leading into the play’s second act. Things quickly start to spiral out of control. Bennet and Cooper start to assassinate homophobic public figures, and the play’s central conflict as one between moderation and extremism shines bright through the second act as the roommates kill their homophobic political opponents. This might sound serious, but it cannot be stressed enough that despite an increasingly dark subject matter, "Angry Fags" remains hilarious throughout. The bleak yet queer dialogue between Cooper and Bennet is a constant delight. They fluctuate effortlessly between trivial gossip and where to draw the line when it comes to killing their enemies. Even though the play was originally performed in 2013, the political messaging of the play is relevant in the current political moment — with Haines and her opponent Peggy Musgrove (Renee Reed) in many ways reminiscent of the recent presidential election. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Musgrove, a Black woman running as a republican, is particularly threatening to Haines because she is more of an outsider than Haines. Though Haines was once an activist, she has mellowed out into a part of the political machine in the time she’s been in office. Similar to 2024 presidential candidate Kamala Harris, Haines is reluctant to take an extreme position on anything for fear of losing moderate voters. Some of her campaign staff agree with this stance, but Bennet disagrees in a way that drives him away from the campaign and toward Cooper’s extremism. In one scene, Adam and Bennett briefly discuss their divergent viewpoints on Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, arguing about why she lost. One argues that she failed to win over the electorate because she was tied to Bill Clinton and did not become the feminist icon she would have if she left him. With how this play has been consistently updated to include modern political references, I would be shocked if there was not someday a version of this play where this discussion is more focused on Harris than Clinton. The discussion of Clinton clinging too close to her husband and losing votes from the left maps straight onto Harris clinging too close to President Joe Biden and losing votes from the left. Ultimately, the central dialogue between liberalism and leftist extremism that this play walks the audience through resolves without clarity. Both perspectives are treated rationally and fully argued through, allowing the audience to draw their own conclusions. In the end it is unclear about who is correct on what the best way to achieve their political motivations are. However, it should be noted that while there is a political question at play, there is no doubt as to the moral question — Bennet and Cooper kill too many people for that debate to have two sides. In a 2015 interview with Backstage Magazine, playwright Topher Payne said that “if you can make someone laugh, they listen. And they lean in, and they want to hear more. And once you have that level of engagement, then you can start layering in a message that you want them to take away.” "Angry Fags" embodies its creator’s philosophy. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Wisconsin 'Forward' Statue stands in front of the entrance to the Wisconsin State Capitol. Photo by Drake White-Bergey | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Republican lawmakers to reintroduce bill banning gender-affirming care for minors Wisconsin Republican lawmakers are prepared to reintroduce bills banning gender-affirming care after the U.S. Supreme Court signaled they may uphold a Tennessee anti-trans law. By Anna Kleiber December 5, 2024 | 12:06pm CST Republican lawmakers plan to reintroduce legislation banning gender-affirming care for minors after the U.S Supreme Court signaled the issue should be left to the states to decide. The Supreme Court’s conservative majority hinted Wednesday they may uphold a Tennessee law that prohibits gender-affirming care for minors. Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Brett Kavanaugh suggested the issue should be debated in state legislatures, not the courts. Following the hearing, Rep. Scott Allen, R-Waukesha, told CBS58 he plans to reintroduce his bill that would reduce access to gender transition services including sterilization surgeries, mastectomies, puberty blockers and hormones for minors. Rep. Barbara Dittrich, R-Oconomowoc, defended the bill, adding that she plans to reintroduce her bill to ban transgender youth from playing on women and girls’ sports teams this coming legislative session, according to CBS58. "It's such a permanent decision to make," Dittrich told CBS58. "There are many things we don't allow minors to do that are really serious and I think this is one of them. It's concerning." Previously, Allen, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, R-Rochester, and Sen. Duey Stroebel, R-Cedarburg, proposed the same bill in October 2023 titled the “Help Not Harm Act.” In July 2022, Republicans introduced another similar bill that did not reach a public hearing or vote. A total of 14 anti-LGBTQ+ bills were introduced during the 2024 legislative session, all of which failed to pass the Legislature or were vetoed by Gov. Tony Evers. Evers has promised to veto legislation targeting transgender Wisconsinites. This is a developing story. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Alders introduce resolution to censure Ald. Charles Myadze following sexual harassment investigation District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan heads the initiative to censure District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze following a sexual harassment investigation that found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze guilty. By Marin Rosen November 20, 2024 | 6:13pm CST Content warning: This story contains information about sexual harassment and domestic violence. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan, alongside eight members of the Madison Common Council and Mayor Satya-Rhodes Conway, introduced a resolution Wednesday to censure District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze following a sexual harassment investigation. The investigation found insufficient evidence to prove Myadze broke state law despite at least three women alleging he sexually harassed them. One of the women was District 2 Ald. Julianna Bennett, who said in a statement Thursday Myadze “persisted and refused” to respect her boundaries on multiple occasions and threatened her after seeking guidance on the situation. The initial investigation into Myadze conducted Aug. 9 found sufficient evidence of workplace hostility and harassment, but was recently revised after Myadze’s attorney requested the case be reopened. “The City should be a safe work environment,” Govindarajan said in a Wednesday post on X. “The patterns of unethical behavior we've seen are unbecoming of an alder, and Myadze should resign immediately.” The incident did not qualify as workplace harassment because Myadze’s behavior did not disrupt the women’s ability to perform their jobs, according to the investigation. While a censure will not remove Myadze from the Common Council or committees, Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal he moved to censure because “it is the right thing to do.” “When the Common Council gets together, and if they vote in favor of this, they are saying we disapprove of it,” Govindarajan said. “It is not what an alder should be doing. It is inappropriate.” Bennett, District 5 Ald. Regina Vidaver, District 3 Ald. Derek Field, District 16 Ald. Jael Currie, District 17 Ald. Sabrina V. Madison, District 6 Ald. Marsha A. Rummel, District 4 Ald. Michael Verveer, Council President Yannette Figueroa Cole and Rhodes-Conway sponsored the resolution. Bennett previously told the Cardinal that legal reform is in order because women in these situations are often conditioned to “keep the peace” and remain cordial during abuse. Because independent elected officials, such as alders, are not under the same jurisdiction as city employees, the city cannot hold alders to the same standards as city employees, according to a statement from Rhodes-Conway. “If the same behaviors that Ald. Myadze engaged in was done by a [city] department head, that person likely would face anything from a simple warning to termination,” Govindarajan said. “But because of the fact that this conduct was conducted by an alder, there's no real way to hold that person accountable other than censuring them.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Govindarajan told the Cardinal he believes the best thing for Myadze to do is resign immediately. “Let’s take any constituents, and hypothetically they have experienced sexual harassment or domestic violence,” Govindarajan said. “How are they going to reach out to their alderperson if that alderperson is known to be sexually harassing folks? That is a disservice that Charles Myadze is doing to his own constituents.” The resolution will be formally introduced at the council meeting Nov. 26 and voted on Dec. 10, according to Govindarajan. Student support and community resources are available via University Health Services’ crisis line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Marin RosenMarin Rosen is the city news editor for The Daily Cardinal and a second-year journalism student. Throughout her time at the Cardinal, she's written articles for city and state news. She is an intern at Channel 3000 News and runs the Badger Beat on Instagram and TikTok. Follow her on Twitter at @marin_rosen More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Donald Trump speaks at the Republican National Convention on July 18, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Trump’s proposal to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education would impact Wisconsin students Wisconsin students would face the brunt of the impact if the U.S. Department of Education was abolished, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. By Olivia Ruetten December 4, 2024 | 2:00am CST While Republican President-elect Donald Trump has promised to overhaul many parts of the U.S. government, he’s said he wants to eliminate one entirely: the U.S. Department of Education (DOE). Trump vowed to shut down the DOE, echoing calls from the conservative Heritage Foundation’s Project 2025 to terminate the agency, which it calls a “convenient one-stop shop for the woke education cartel.” Throughout his campaign, Trump distanced himself from Project 2025 and has claimed that he had no idea who wrote it — however, recent cabinet picks may suggest otherwise. The DOE has been a point of contention among politicians on both sides of the aisle since its creation in 1979. The conservative push to abolish the DOE comes from the Republican Party’s long-standing belief in smaller-scale government intervention into daily life. Republicans believe that education, like other mainstream issues like abortion and voting rights, should be up to states to decide. In Wisconsin, Republican lawmakers have championed school choice, and have called for education policy to return to state and local governments. On the campaign trail, both Trump and U.S. Senate candidate Eric Hovde voiced their support for the elimination of the DOE and the localization of public schools. At a campaign visit to Milwaukee in October, Trump singled out the city as the “home of the first and oldest school choice” program and declared education is “the civil rights issue of our age,” according to the New York Post. Roughly 63% of Wisconsin Republicans said they were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with Wisconsin’s public schools, according to an August 2024 Marquette Law School poll. Republicans champion school choice, advocate for the localization of schools Republicans have strongly advocated for school choice, which they define as the right for parents to choose where their child goes to school, public or private, and what their school teaches them. Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson spoke in favor of school choice and advocated for education policy to be handled at a local level during a Moms for Liberty event held at the Republican National Convention in July. “I’m hoping that one result from Moms for Liberty is we start moving away from these massive, large schools, and we start moving more toward the old one-room school,” Johnson said at the event. Former Wisconsin governor Tommy Thompson supported Wisconsin’s first school choice movement of the 1990s, which saw Milwaukee’s private school population increase from 341 students in 1990 to 29,000 students in 2021, according to School Choice Wisconsin, Many conservative families fear public educational institutions are “woke,” meaning schools prioritize teaching children about social injustice and traditionally liberal values over actual educational material. This pushes families toward private or Christian schools that are privately run and funded. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Wisconsin offers options for parents who do not want to send their child to public school. Private schools service 13.5% of Wisconsin students, while homeschooling options service 2.96%, according to Johns Hopkins School of Education. Additionally, Wisconsin’s private school voucher program services 43% of privately educated students, and this number is expected to grow by 60% once the voucher program’s enrollment cap sunsets in 2026. Trump’s current pick for Secretary of Education is Linda McMahon, wife of former WWE chairman Vince McMahon. She has advocated for school choice and said she will be a “fierce advocate for Parents.” The National Education Association has disavowed McMahon, saying she “has an agenda to privatize public education — much like Betsy DeVos before her.” What is the state’s role in education, and what does the DOE actually do? Wisconsin schools allocate state and local taxes to state and local schools, which are run by a board of elected or appointed officials who decide what is taught within the school district. What information is disseminated in schools is also not typically decided by the federal government. Gov. Tony Evers recently signed a partial veto boosting school funding for the next 400 years. Evers provided the state of Wisconsin with 400 years of ongoing, predictable funding increases which aim to better fund Wisconsin’s public schools. State superintendent Jill Underly hopes to use the extra funding to boost mental health, school nutrition and special education resources. One of the DOE’s responsibilities is distributing federal aid for K-12 schools and key federal student loans and aid for college and university students. For example, the DOE provided $190 billion to schools for emergency relief during the pandemic. Financial aid programs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison benefit 58% of first-year students, and the average financial aid package for first-year students is over $12,000. Without the DOE, the responsibility of financial aid distribution would go to another federal department. Project 2025 suggests sending this responsibility to the Department of Treasury, though officials said moving the Office of Federal Student Aid out of the DOE would create chaos worse than the rollout of the 2024-2025 FAFSA form last fall. Additionally, the DOE regulates programs created under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act that ensure children with disabilities and students ages 3 to 21 from low-income families have equitable access to educational resources. In Wisconsin, 14.1% of students have an Individualized Education Plan, 3% of students have a specific learning disability and 1.1% of students have a 504 plan. Without the DOE, these programs may lose regulation and disabled students’ rights to an equitable education may be violated, according to nonprofit education reporting organization Chalkbeat. People suggesting public schools are “woke” take issue with the DOE’s Office for Civil Rights, which addresses allegations of race, gender and sexuality-based discrimination. It also handles investigations of sexual assault. But guidelines introduced during President Barack Obama’s administration to enhance the handling of assault cases were rolled back by the Trump administration following criticism that the policies were “too harsh.” Political experts said it’s unlikely Trump will follow through on his claims that he would close the DOE. The DOE could be divided and given to other government agencies to take care of, and Title I, the federal government’s main funding stream for K-12 schools, would be given to the states. States would be allowed to use this funding in different ways as they see fit, leading to an uneven distribution of educational material across the country, according to US News. The process to eliminate the agency would take roughly 10 years, according to the New York Times. The resulting extreme funding cuts for public education would be unpopular, with Congress likely to vote against it. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Courtesy of Google Maps | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison approves police oversight, older adult services amendments during budget meeting The Council voted to include amendments related to police oversight and other services for Madison residents. By Joseph Panzer November 13, 2024 | 5:31pm CST The Madison Common Council approved Amendments Five and Four of the 2025 operating budget relating to police oversight and older adult services respectively and an additional traffic engineering amendment Tuesday during the first of multiple budget deliberation meetings. The 2025 Executive Operating Budget, introduced by Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway in October and adopted unanimously by the Common Council Tuesday, is partially funded by a $22 million property tax referendum approved by Madison residents on Nov. 5. The final budget must be approved by the council by Nov 14. The council passed 15-5 an amendment restoring $127,210 in funding to the Office of the Independent Monitor (OIM) for employee salaries and legal services. Accountability for firing members of the Madison Police Department who engage in misconduct is through a state appointed board, which led the city to create theOIM in 2020 to give more power to local citizens. Despite having been around for years, the OIM only started accepting complaints last month. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal he is “okay” with continued funding to the OIM despite “valid concerns” about its effectiveness. “That being said, I believe the council should take measures to ensure that the OIM is held accountable to specific goals set by the council,” Govindarajan said. The Common Council also approved by a narrow 11-9 vote a reallocation of $103,870 from the Community Development Division to purchased services for the Older Adult Services Request for Proposal (RFP). The Older Adult Services RFP handles case management and outreach and referral programs for seniors in the Madison area. During the meeting, District 17 Ald. Sabrina V. Madison had concerns on the amendment’s impact on seniors from marginalized communities. Most of the services seniors receive in Madison are through nonprofits that have to apply for funding from money that the city sets aside for them, which this amendment seeks to change due to perceived bias, Govindarajan said. “The city is now debating on deprioritizing what we want to fund,” Govindarajan said. “We’ve historically funded lots of senior services that have benefited older seniors who tend to be more established and resourced, but we haven’t funded nonprofits that help BIPOC/queer seniors.” Black residents in Madison’s South Side have previously told the Cap Times they have not received senior support services from nonprofits like NewBridge in the past as organizations tighten who gets access to resources and programs around the city. Alders also unanimously adopted a $6.3 million amendment to the capital budget for Traffic Engineering during the meeting. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The amendment would allow for Traffic Engineering to accept federal funds for safety improvements, including real-time communication between first responders and transportation authorities, prioritization of traffic lights for emergency vehicles and allowing the city to increase data collection on traffic incidents to reevaluate how it responds to high-risk situations, Govindarajan told the Cardinal. “[This amendment] helps us improve our roads and keep our residents safe,” Govindarajan said. “Allowing emergency vehicles to get through faster on our main roads (including Park Street) will be a major improvement.” Common Council budget deliberations are scheduled to continue through Nov. 14. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
photo courtesy of Warner Bros. Pictures ARTS ‘Dune: Part Two’ is the sequel fans have been waiting for Denis Villeneuve’s second installment to the series is a sci-fi masterpiece. By Marit Erickson April 2, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Sometimes I think to myself: “Is Timothee Chalamet really talented, or do I just find him attractive?” Denis Villeneuve’s “Dune: Part Two” finally answered this question for me. “Dune: Part Two” is the sequel to 2021’s “Dune.” The plot follows Paul Atreides (Timothee Chalamet), a young aristocrat looking to bring power back to his decimated family. The long-awaited film stars Chalamet, Zendaya, Austin Butler, Florence Pugh and several other successful, big-name actors. Most of the “Dune” series takes place on the planet Arrakis, an arid wasteland home to the indigenous Fremen. The Fremen bring in Paul and his mother, Lady Jessica (Rebecca Ferguson), after the cataclysmic events that ended the former film. Fremen like Chani (Zendaya) teach Paul how to thrive on the dangerous desert planet. Paul struggles with haunting visions of the future as he works to bring down those who wronged him, primarily the evil House Harkonnen, which now dominates Arrakis. To preface, I have never read the original book series by Frank Herbert, and thus will not be basing my review on its faithfulness to the source material. I have to acknowledge Greig Fraser’s jaw-dropping cinematography. Watching this in IMAX was a religious experience. Every scene had a new gorgeous shot for me to marvel over. “Dune: Part Two” uses color in such an inventive way. My favorite example of this was the orange sand Fremen use in battle to obscure themselves from enemies. The thick orange haze looks stunning while also creating suspense in tense combat scenes. When Butler’s character Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen is introduced, the film goes completely black and white. We are treated to huge, bird’s-eye panning shots of a riotous stadium, packed with bald freaks thirsty for blood sport. The color shift perfectly intensifies the outlandish feeling of the Harkonnen clan. Making out-of-the-box choices like these makes me excited for where cinema is headed. The performances in “Dune: Part Two” were also phenomenal. Rebecca Ferguson immediately stands out — her portrayal of Lady Jessica was gripping throughout the nearly three-hour runtime. Most mother figures in these types of stories are either warm and nurturing or dead, but Lady Jessica is nothing of the sort. She is striking, intimidating, violent and powerful. It's so refreshing to see a female character like her in science fiction. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Chalamet is seriously great in this. My Oscar campaign starts now. Overacting is a big pet peeve of mine, and I never think he crosses that line. His performance is both subtle and moving. He can yell, but the scenes in which he is reserved and contemplative seem just as important. I also want to give a Dave Bautista shoutout. That man was just a WWE wrestler, and now he’s doing stuff like this. I locked in every time his character, Glossu Rabban, came on screen. There’s no way I could give credit to every performance in “Dune: Part Two” because the cast is so huge and talented. Zendaya is great. Butler was an evil freaky weirdo in the best way possible. I want to give Josh Brolin a big hug. Javier Bardem made me laugh on multiple occasions. And lest I forget Hans Zimmer’s score. Every time Loire Cotler belted out her battle cry, I got goosebumps. Her vocals are unreal. Zimmer’s score perfectly grounds viewers in the mood of the movie. It’s foreign yet familiar, old and futuristic — exactly like “Dune.” A friend of mine described “Dune: Part Two” as sci-fi “Game of Thrones,” which I think perfectly encapsulates why I loved it so much. It’s just epic. There’s no other way to describe something this long and intense as well as emotional, thrilling and rewarding. I feel like the first person to read The Odyssey or watch “Star Wars.” I see this series as a testament to human imagination. How wonderful is it that we can escape into a world so immersive and detailed? I still can’t believe this film exists. We are so blessed to be living in the age of CGI. Please go watch “Dune: Part Two” and marvel over how big those sandworms look. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Comedian Iliza Shlesinger performs during Chairman’s USO Holiday Tour at Morón Air Base Dec. 21, 2017. Marine Corps Gen. Joe Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Army Command Sgt. Maj. John W. Troxell, senior enlisted advisor to the chairman, along with USO entertainers, visited service members who are deployed during the holidays at various locations across Europe and the Middle East. This year’s entertainers were Chef Robert Irvine, wrestler Gail Kim, comedian Iliza Shlesinger, actor Adam Devine, country musician Jerrod Niemann, and WWE Superstars “The Miz” and Alicia Fox. (DoD photo by Navy Petty Officer 1st Class Dominique A. Pineiro/Released) Photo by Dominique A. Pineiro | and Dominique A. Pineiro The Daily Cardinal ARTS Popular comedians coming to Madison venues this semester By Morgan Spohn September 5, 2018 | 8:00am CDT Many famous comedians will be performing in Madison this fall, including those who have had specials on Comedy Central and Netflix — here are just a handful of them. Iliza Shlesinger – Shlesinger is known for hosting the syndicated dating show “Excused” on CBS, “Separation Anxiety” on TBS and the late night talk show “Truth & Iliza” on Freeform. Shlesinger, whose career started by winning Myspace’s “So You Think You’re Funny” competition, has also been featured as G4 network’s “Myspace Girl of the Week.” Her career came to the forefront when she won NBC’s “Last Comic Standing” in 2008. Netflix subscribers will most likely remember her four Netflix specials that have aired on the platform, with the most recent one being “Elder Millennial,” which aired on July 24, 2018. If you would like to go out and see Shlesinger live onstage, she will be in Madison Sept. 12 at the Overture Center. Hannibal Buress – Buress is known for his co-hosting of the “Eric Andre Show” on Adult Swim and for appearing on the critically acclaimed “Broad City” on Comedy Central. Buress started his career by starting at open mic nights in 2002 around the Chicago area. Buress released his first standup album My Name is Hannibal that was released on July 27, 2010. I’ve personally seen Buress live three times in a comedy club in Rochester, Minnesota, and his comedy style can best be described as chill and down to earth: He creates an environment where the audience can relax and enjoy a fun night out. Shortly after that, he was featured on “The Awkward Comedy Show” special on Comedy Central. If you would like to go out and see Buress perform live, he will be in Madison Sept. 20 at the Orpheum Theater. Bert Kreischer – Kreischer is known for his shows “Trip Bert the Conqueror” and “Trip Flip” on the Travel Channel. Although he went into being a mainstream actor on these shows, his career started off with comedy and partying. Kreischer’s first bit of national attention came when he was featured in a Rolling Stone article while attending Florida State University. The magazine named Kreischer “the top partier at the Number One Party School in the country.” Kreischer has only had two comedy specials: He released the first one in 2009 on Comedy Central titled “Bert Kreischer: Comfortably Dumb,” and his second special “Bert Kreischer: The Machine” aired on Showtime in 2016. If you would like to see Bert “The Machine” Kreischer, he will be in Madison Sept. 20-22 at Comedy Club on State. Craig Ferguson – Ferguson is known for being the host of “The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson,” which aired from 2005 to 2014 on the CBS late-night lineup. Ferguson, in my opinion, should be considered a veteran in the comedy world, as his first special aired almost 10 years ago with “Craig Ferguson: A Wee Bit O’ Revolution.” His fourth comedic album, titled Craig Ferguson: Just Being Honest, was a Grammy-nominated album in 2016. Ferguson’s albums have revolved around his hectic life and experiences from being in the industry for almost four decades. To see the former late show host, head to the Barrymore Theatre on Oct. 29. Judd Apatow – Apatow is most known for his directing credits on “The 40-Year-Old Virgin,” “Knocked Up,” “Funny People,” “This Is 40” and “Trainwreck.” His work as a producer includes “Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy,” “Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby,” “Superbad,” “Pineapple Express,” “Freaks and Geeks,” “Undeclared,” “Girls,” “Love” and “Crashing. After taking a 25 year hiatus from stand-up comedy, Apatow returned to the stage to release his first ever stand-up comedy special titled “Judd Apatow: The Return” toward the tail end of last year. Apatow has been touring since the release of his special — if you would like to go out and see the comedic writing legend live, he will be in Madison Nov 2-4 at Comedy Club on State. Lewis Black – Black is best known for his Comedy Central series “Lewis Black’s Root of All Evil” and appearances on “The Daily Show with Trevor Noah” delivering his “Back in Black” commentary segment, which he has been doing since “The Daily Show” was hosted by Craig Kilborn. He started his comedy career all the way back in 1981, and if you have caught anything from him, his style of comedy is reminiscent of George Carlin’s style. I have seen him live twice, and just a fair warning: If you are of the faint of heart when it comes to fowl or perverse language, he will not shy away from dropping f-bombs throughout his set. If you would like to go out and see a mental breakdown unfold in front of your eyes, Black will be in Madison Nov. 29 at the Orpheum Theater. Morgan Spohn is an arts and sports writer for the Daily Cardinal. To read more of his work, click here. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More World debut of ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ musical brings a modern twist to Christmas spirit Q&A: Mason Ramsey is more than his Walmart origins in new album, tour Jean Laurenz’ multi-media show ‘DESCENDED’ takes the audience on a liberating spiritual journey
A deer through binoculars. Photo by Nicole Steele | The Daily Cardinal SCIENCE The unknown side of hunting: Traditions, overpopulation and conservation What to know about hunting before the whitetail season starts Sept. 14. By Nicole Steele September 13, 2024 | 2:00am CDT It’s that time of year again: the leaves are starting to change color, the days are getting shorter and the temperature is slowly decreasing. Thousands of hunters will be walking the woods on Sept. 14, in search of the elusive whitetail deer, hoping to catch a glimpse of a buck to hang on their walls. Scott Katzenberger, an avid hunter who’s been hunting for more than 40 years in northern Wisconsin, said he still enjoys getting the chance to be out in nature and deepen relationships. “I’ve been able to bond with my high school friends. I think about all the moments that I bonded with my dad and my family. I got to take my son deer hunting for 3 years. I just got married, and now I hunt with my new wife and she loves to go, and it’s a big part of our life,” he told The Daily Cardinal. But there is more to the story of hunting than meets the eye. Hunting is less of a survival use and more of a recreational pastime, according to PETA. The animals suffer in pain during the process of being shot, with the risk of being wounded and suffering even more, the organization argued. Still, Katzenberger said hunters never try to cause harm to wildlife or the land that they hunt on. “I think most hunters have more respect for wildlife and nature than most people realize,” Katzenberger said. “Everything that we hunt and take as game goes across our table as food, [and] everything that we take we have a legal license in order to consume.” Hunting accidents, such as destroying property or unintentionally killing an animal or human, occur frequently each year. Out of around 18 million hunting participants, 4,700 of those were involved in an accident in 2018, according to the National Shooting Sports Foundation. Since the introduction of hunter’s safety courses in Wisconsin in 1967, all hunters in Wisconsin born after 1973 are required to receive a hunter’s safety certification. As a result, incidents have decreased by 96%. The Wisconsin deer population is at an all-time high, according to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Mandatory registration of each deer harvested helps track population trends, and other factors such as weather, the length of the hunting season and the amount of hunters that register affect the population statistics. Katzenberger said that hunting is a great way to reduce overpopulation. “When any animal gets overpopulated, there’s more disease amongst the herd. There’s a lot of evidence [that hunting] keeps the deer herd in check but healthy. And when I say healthy I mean it’s not so overrun that they’re decimating the population of a lot of other game,” he said. Every three years, the DNR releases a map of Wisconsin showing counties with high, maintained and low population density of deer. This can help hunters determine the best counties to hunt in to reduce overpopulation, the counties to not hunt in to increase population and the counties to hunt in to help maintain population. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Overpopulation also has the possibility of increasing traffic accidents. Between 15,000 and 19,000 deer crashes occur annually on Wisconsin roadways, according to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. “[When] your deer population is way out of control, you’re gonna have way more accidents on the highway, and deer hits raise insurance prices,” Katzenberger said. And due to overpopulation across the state, chronic wasting disease (CWD) is becoming more prevalent each year. “Chronic wasting disease is a fatal, infectious nervous system disease of deer, moose, elk and reindeer/caribou. It belongs to the family of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) or prion diseases. CWD occurs only in members of the cervid or deer family — both wild and captive,” Christina Kizewski, a wildlife biologist for the Wisconsin DNR, told The Daily Cardinal. Kizweski said there are some practices hunters can follow in order to slow and control the spread of CWD, including testing deer for CWD by removing the lymph nodes in the neck. The DNR and partner supporters also have many deer carcass dumpsters across the state. Managed hunting plays a large role in the DNR’s conservation and land management efforts, Kizweski said. “It helps keep populations in check and keep a balance on the landscape,” she said. “Without hunting, species populations can grow to unhealthy levels where disease outbreaks can occur more readily and could impact human health and safety.” For people who don’t hunt but would like to support conservation, just purchasing a license can help, Kizweski said. “Hunting license fees are used for habitat management for species, and monitoring and research objectives as well. Even if folks are not interested in harvesting an animal, the purchase of a hunting license contributes financially to landscape level work, which supports wildlife in multiple facets,” said Kizweski. Hunting is more than just the importance of conservation, the reduction in overpopulation or the reduction of diseases, according to Katzenberger. It’s a tradition, an endless part of many families lives that many hope to pass onto future generations. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Courtesy of NIAID/Flickr The mpox virus (orange) in an infected cell (green) taken at the NIAID Integrative Research Facility in Fort Detrick, Maryland. SCIENCE WHO declares mpox international public health emergency, Wisconsin remains low in risk A new and contagious strain of mpox has made its way out of Central Africa, but the CDC considers the risk of the strain to be low in the United States for now. By Sonia Bendre and Lindsay Pfeiffer September 5, 2024 | 2:00am CDT The World Health Organization Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus declared mpox a public health emergency of international concern on Aug. 14 following the uptick in cases in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the spread of the virus across surrounding African countries. On Aug. 15, the public health agency of Sweden confirmed that strain Clade Ib of mpox reached outside of Africa to Sweden, where a traveler picked up the virus after visiting one of the countries affected by mpox. Since then, cases have been reported in Thailand and the Philippines, according to the New York Times. At the moment, the risk to Wisconsin and the general U.S. public is very low, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. What is mpox? Mpox, previously called monkeypox, is a virus similar to smallpox, though less severe and less contagious. There are two different strains of the virus, and the current strain is mostly caused by Clade Ib, a mutant of Clade I, according to the WHO. Typically endemic to central Africa, Clade Ib is more severe and more deadly than the genetically distinct strain that caused an outbreak in 2022, Clade II. “Whether the mortality or death rate would be similar in DRC versus somewhere else like the U.S. is unknown. But, obviously, we have to be hesitant upfront and watch very closely because it does have this increased mortality compared to the other version,” Dan Shirley, an infectious disease physician and medical director for infection prevention at UW Health, told The Daily Cardinal. Were the virus to spread, the mortality rate is expected to be lower in the U.S. than in the DRC. Unlike in the DRC, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has already approved use of two vaccines against mpox. The fatality rate for Clade Ib is around 10% in children and five percent in adults, compared to a fatality rate of one percent or lower in both populations for Clade II. The virus is also more deadly for those with comorbidities such as HIV. The virus is zoonotic — transmittable from animals to humans — and was discovered in 1958 in a monkey, though monkeys are not the infection source. It was first discovered in humans in the DRC in 1970. It belongs to the Orthopox family, along with 12 other DNA viruses. The family includes smallpox. “[Orthopox] is a group of viruses that all cause a pox disease, pustules that are on your skin,” Emma Mohr, an assistant professor in the Department of Pediatrics, told the Cardinal. Mohr’s research focuses on the transmission of Clade IIb mpox from mother to fetus during pregnancy. Mpox can also be spread person-to-person via physical contact, and Clade Ib can be transmitted sexually and through contaminated objects, as well as to a fetus through an infected mother. Those affected can experience a variety of symptoms, including swollen lymph nodes, fever and, most notably, skin lesions, which generally take weeks to heal. “The skin lesions can be all over your body, including in your mouth and down by your bottom, and can impact your ability to swallow liquids, keep liquids down and stay hydrated. Sometimes the infection is so severe that it infects the lungs and infects the brain, and that's why people die,” said Mohr. This outbreak comes on the heels of a 2022 outbreak of the Clade II strain of the virus, which affected 95,000 people across 115 countries, and over 32,000 in the U.S. alone, including 97 in Wisconsin, according to the CDC. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Both Mohr and Shirley agreed there will likely be cases of Clade Ib in the U.S. Whereas the previous outbreak affected primarily sexually active gay and bisexual men, the new outbreak primarily affects children. Around 70% of the now over 20,000 cases in DRC are in children under 15, and case numbers are likely underreported due to limitations in contact tracing, testing and surveillance, according to the WHO. More than 95% of all cases of the new strain originate from DRC, although the virus has affected 13 countries in total, according to the New York Times. So far, 975 deaths have been reported in DRC alone. Besides vaccines, social distancing can slow the disease’s spread. But some places in DRC, particularly displacement camps, are so crowded that they make distancing difficult or impossible. “I hope that the global community is able to help intervene now that the WHO has called it a public health emergency of international concern and really help to get medical care and vaccines to these impacted populations in the civil unrest in that area,” said Mohr. Recently, the WHO Director-General initiated the process for Emergency Use Listing of mpox vaccines. This listing allows companies to submit vaccines for approval and distribution by partners such as Gavi and UNICEF. Although the Emergency Use Listing of the vaccine has been initiated, it has not yet been approved, and the WHO has not officially approved the two available vaccines for use. This complicates the process for vaccines to be transported into DRC — it is estimated that around 10 million vaccines will be needed to quell the virus. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Lindsay PfeifferLindsay Pfeiffer is the science editor for The Daily Cardinal. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Maddie Schwartz has done it all for Wisconsin, but now she doesn’t have to Senior pitcher Maddie Schwartz has cemented herself among Wisconsin’s best pitchers in recent history. Now, as good as ever, Schwartz hopes to end her career on a high note as a deeper bullpen begins to fill around her. By Justin Alpert March 9, 2023 | 2:00am CST On April 29, 2022, Wisconsin’s Maddie Schwartz and Penn State’s Bailey Parshall — who led the women’s softball conference with a 1.68 ERA — engaged in an epic pitcher’s duel. Through nine innings, the late-season contest remained scoreless. Badger left fielder Morgan Kummer homered to give Wisconsin a 1-0 lead in the top of the 10th. Schwartz, 103 pitches into her 29th appearance of the season, induced three straight groundouts in the bottom of the inning to secure the Friday victory. The senior’s 21st win of 2022 was arguably her most impressive: 10 innings and 110 pitches, allowing only one hit and one walk. With eight strikeouts and 20 groundouts, the Nittany Lions spent 10 innings mashing the ball into the dirt, if they made any contact at all. Schwartz had surely earned herself a restful Saturday as Wisconsin continued the weekend series with a double-header. But not quite. Schwartz was back in the circle for a 3 p.m. first pitch. In an efficient 41 pitches, she allowed one hit over four scoreless innings, tallying yet another victory as Wisconsin crushed Penn State, 8-1. Taylor Wolfram Schwartz might have gone the distance in the blowout win had she not been scheduled to start the nightcap as well. Her third and final start of the series was a tough-luck loss, as she allowed four runs (one earned) over 6.2 innings. Leading 3-2 and one out from a third-straight win, Schwartz watched third baseman Skylar Sirdashney’s error unravel into a walk-off rally for the Nittany Lions. Wisconsin’s ace right-hander hurled 251 pitches in a 25-hour span. For Schwartz, it was just another weekend in the office. At season’s end, her 213 innings ranked third in the Big Ten and her 2.46 ERA ranked ninth. Alongside Schwartz on the Badger pitching staff were Tessa Magnanimo (54.1 innings, 3.35 ERA) and Ava Justman (62.1, 3.93). When it mattered most, however, whether a series opener, a must-win game or a late-inning jam, coach Yvette Healy trusted Schwartz most in the circle. “They’ve never really thought about not using me in any situation,” Schwartz said. “I worked so hard through the middle of my career that I got to the point where I didn’t want anyone else to have the ball.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Born a Badger The Chanhassen, Minnesota native didn’t need much convincing to become a Badger. Schwartz, whose grandfather and great-grandfather attended the University of Wisconsin-Madison, grew up rooting for Wisconsin sports. Healy’s recruiting efforts sealed the deal, but Madison attracted Schwartz for more reasons than pitching. “I put all my eggs in one basket,” Schwartz said. “That obviously isn’t smart for recruiting, but this is where I really wanted to be. I knew if softball wasn’t a factor, I wanted to be here for school. As soon as it was an option, I made the easy decision.” Schwartz’s omnipresence in the circle for Wisconsin in 2022 wasn’t handed to her. Rather, it was the product of her learning and developing under older veteran pitchers. She credits ex-Badger Kaitlyn Menz, who threw 637 innings from 2017-20 with 66 wins and a 2.55 ERA, with helping her grow as a young pitcher. While Menz appeared in 36 games (25 starts) in 2019, the freshman Schwartz made a strong first impression. She posted a 1.64 ERA and held opponents to a .239 average in 55.1 innings, and she also threw a shutout in one of her three starts. Throughout that debut season, Schwartz envisioned herself as more than a bullpen arm. “I tried to model some of my work ethic around people like [Menz],” Schwartz said. “I had my time learning and waiting in the wings. It was kind of how I went about my business in the offseason — I was hungry to earn that starting role.” Schwartz made eight appearances, all in relief, through the first 24 games of 2020. Her 2.50 ERA and 17:2 K:BB suggested she’d be starting games soon, but COVID-19 wiped out the rest of the schedule. Taylor Wolfram A year later, she finally emerged as the ace and as Menz’s successor, carrying Wisconsin’s pitching staff with 156.2 innings and a career-best 2.23 ERA. By every metric — innings, batters faced, starts, complete games and more — Schwartz was one of the premier workhorses in the Big Ten. The rubber-armed righty continued in 2022 with head-turning weekends like the one at Penn State. Making 41 appearances (30 starts) in Wisconsin’s 51-game schedule, Schwartz willed the Badgers to a 30-21 record and an NCAA Tournament appearance. There, she logged a save in the first-round victory over Canisius before struggling in a close victory over Georgia Tech. What about Schwartz has allowed her to pitch so often, yet so well, for the Badgers since 2021? Physical preparation and adaptability Healy doesn’t hesitate to put Schwartz, who has no track record of injuries, in the circle time and time again. That doesn’t mean Schwartz is immune to fatigue, though. “It definitely becomes a grind toward the end of the season,” she said. “I’m just so lucky to get the ball in those big situations, so I never really think ‘my arm’s hurting’ or anything like that.” In games she doesn’t start, Schwartz must stay loose throughout and get ready quickly when called upon. On Feb. 25 versus North Carolina, for example, Magnanimo entered for the final out of the seventh inning but allowed two baserunners. Schwartz took over and induced a game-ending groundout. “It’s definitely a little more rushed,” Schwartz said of her preparation as a reliever. “You can’t just check out — you have to keep your body moving and not let soreness set in. I’ve found a routine that works for me. Our coaches are pretty good about telling us when they see us coming in, but it can definitely switch on a dime.” Although Schwartz wasn’t satisfied with her early-career relief role, she admits it helped her save innings for this massive late-career workload. Composure under pressure While Schwartz was confident as a freshman and sophomore, she felt she lacked the composure to battle through high-pressure situations, she said. Once again, she looked up to Menz as a model for excellence. “I didn’t understand how she was so stoic and even-keeled out there,” Schwartz reflected. “That was something I really longed for because I felt like every time I was out there I was trying not to mess up. That’s obviously not how you play well and find success.” Taylor Wolfram Now, in jams like the seventh inning versus North Carolina, Schwartz can effectively control her emotions. “With all my years of experience, it’s kind of who I am now,” she said. A calculated tactical approach Pitchers generally favor either riseballs or dropballs. Riseballs start high and, thanks to backspin, continue rising. This allows them to elude the upward path of swings and generate whiffs. Dropballs, on the other hand, better align with bat paths and generate weak contact when thrown low. Velocity, release point and other traits make one strategy preferable for a given pitcher, but both can be effective: Riseballs lead to strikeouts, dropballs lead to grounders. Schwartz came to Madison as a riseball pitcher. To pitch so many innings and so many games, though, she needed more contact and quicker outs. Those 20 groundouts in the 10-inning Penn State masterpiece? They were a direct product of Schwartz’s newer dropball approach. “Our pitching staff and our coaching staff’s philosophy is no big innings — putting up zeroes or ones, not getting too deep into counts,” Schwartz explained. “I pitch to contact, which obviously isn’t as shiny and pretty [as strikeouts], but it has definitely worked for us.” She compliments her dropball with a curve, an offspeed pitch which catches hitters out in front and leads to feeble contact or whiffs. In her fifth and final season, Schwartz continues to experiment with new offerings. “Usually, early in your career you take away pitches, then as you gain confidence with your few pitches, you add back to your repertoire,” Schwartz said. “I get to play around a lot now, and I have a lot more tools than I had my freshman year. It’s been fun to see how I’ve evolved as a pitcher here.” Relief on the roster Schwartz is striking out 0.63 batters per inning pitched through 36.2 innings in 2023 — right in line with her career rate of 0.65. This year especially, the Badgers don’t need her to be a bat-missing flamethrower. That’s thanks to the arrival of freshman right-hander Paytn Monticelli, whose 70 mph heater has helped her strike out 1.15 batters per inning in the first 41 frames of her career. Most notably, Monticelli struck out 13 Tar Heels in a Feb. 24 complete game. “She’s been a great addition to the staff,” Schwartz said of Monticelli. “She’s doing a great job for us, and she brings so much energy to the field. I’m really excited to see how she can keep contributing to our growth as a program.” Unlike Schwartz in 2019, Monticelli didn’t have to wait long to become a regular starter for Wisconsin. Four of the freshman’s first seven appearances have been starts, and it looks like Monticelli’s here to stay. Schwartz, in contrast, made three starts in 24 total appearances in 2019. Gabi Salo has also emerged to bolster Wisconsin’s pitching depth. The junior has already set a new career-high with 20.1 innings and boasts a 0.69 ERA with 23 strikeouts. A deep pitching staff presents numerous advantages. For one, it keeps everyone more rested throughout the three-month regular season. “Toward the end of last year we were so excited to go play [in the NCAA Tournament], but it’s hard not to run out of gas,” Schwartz said. “It’s a grind of a season, and this will give us more options going into the postseason. We’ve always wanted to win a Big Ten Championship, and having extra arms is definitely how you do it.” Taylor Wolfram The diversity of arms, with Monticelli’s swing-and-miss stuff and Schwartz’s contact-welcoming dropballs, gives Wisconsin’s coaches more options to match up with opposing hitters. Consider an imposing power hitter who feasts on low pitches. In a crucial late-game situation, Healy can bring in Monticelli to throw high riseballs and get a strikeout. Or, with runners in scoring position, Wisconsin could use Schwartz to induce a double-play ball. The best pitching staffs feature a variety of approaches. In that sense, the Badgers’ group is as complete as it’s been during Schwartz’s career. That said, the heightened competition for innings in 2023 hasn’t detracted from the close-knit nature of Wisconsin’s pitching staff. “We’re all in each other’s corner — we think each of us can get it done on any given day,” Schwartz said. “There’s never any ‘Why is she pitching?’ or things like that because we’ve all bought into each other’s journeys as pitchers. We all do better when we all do better.” A leader by example Menz’s stoicism rubbed off on Schwartz, who was once a shy freshman battling for innings. Other leaders during Schwartz’s career include the vocal Ally Miklesh, who graduated from the program in 2022, and Kayla Konwent, Wisconsin’s all-time home-run leader currently in her final season. Because of her immeasurable role the last couple years, Schwartz has found herself in that group. “I’m not necessarily the most vocal, but as a pitcher, I lead the team whether I like it or not,” she said. “It’s been amazing to learn from people like Kayla and Ally. We have a bunch of leaders on the team who lead in different ways, and that’s what makes a good team.” Taylor Wolfram Could Schwartz, who has coached youth softball during summers in Minnesota, have a future in softball beyond her Badger career? She believes so. If not coaching, she hopes to work with sports in some capacity — perhaps applying her consumer behavior and marketplace studies degree to the business side of sports. “There’s a lot of stuff that makes me happy, but coaching and being around the girls is something I’ve found really fulfilling,” Schwartz said. “I hope I can find a career that ties all my interests together.” Finishing strong Opening the season with four straight losses in Mexico was disappointing for the Badgers, but it opened their eyes to areas needing improvement. Lineup adjustments, improved defense and Monticelli’s rapid development have righted the ship as Wisconsin progresses through its early-season schedule. “[Mexico] definitely changed how we go about practice and go about our business,” Schwartz said. “We know nothing’s going to be easy. We have a lot of youth, so people are just shaking out the jitters. I think we’ll hit our stride going into Big Tens.” Wisconsin begins its gauntlet of conference matchups March 24 at Michigan State. The regular season ends May 7, leading into the Big Ten Tournament. After that, if the Badgers have their way, they’ll make a trip to the NCAA Tournament. Injuries and performance will force adjustments to Wisconsin’s depth chart between now and the postseason. When the lights are brightest in May, however, Schwartz will be in the circle. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget
Broday and Bryant: As part of a national campus tour in support of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama, actors Adam Brody and Joy Bryant spoke to students at Memorial Union Wednesday. Photo by Katie Gibbs | and Katie Gibbs The Daily Cardinal ARTS Q&A: ‘We're seven days away from making history’: Actor Adam Brody rallies UW-Madison voters After an enthusiastic visit to the University of Wisconsin-Madison, actor and activist Adam Brody shares his insights on why young voters are crucial in shaping America's future. By Alaina Walsh October 29, 2024 | 6:30am CDT Actor Adam Brody, known for his role as Seth Cohen on the Fox series "The O.C" and most recently as Noah on "Nobody Wants This," hosted a student meet-and-greet on behalf of the Harris-Walz campaign in Madison on Sunday, where he spoke about Madison’s pivotal role in what he called “a historical election.” The Wisconsin Democratic Party hosted the event to encourage University of Wisconsin-Madison students to vote early, backing Vice President Kamala Harris for the upcoming Presidential election. Following the event, Brody spoke privately with small groups of students about their hopes for the election’s outcome. The Daily Cardinal spoke with Brody about why he thought Madison, specifically UW-Madison students, are important in this election, advice he’d give to first-time voters and what he’d take home as a keepsake from Wisconsin. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. How are you feeling about being in Madison? Lovely, enthused, energized and comforted by seeing so many energetic, enthusiastic people who are passionate and hopeful. Why do you think it is so important to talk to University of Wisconsin-Madison students specifically? Well, starting wider and zooming in, Wisconsin is a swing state, and I think students in general, with good reason, tend to lean more Democratic. At the same time, I thought that the participation wasn't going to be as strong. So there's a lot of room there to grow, to activate, to motivate and also they seem to be the people that are interested in talking to me. What would you say to students that are undecided about voting? There’s a list of priorities, policies, positions and rights that I personally care about. Perhaps we share these values or outlooks in common or not — reproductive freedom, the climate crisis, the homelessness problem and the lack of housing, the gun violence epidemic, democracy abroad. These are all big issues. But I would say, regardless of how you feel about any of those…we have a man who’s close to being in office, who is a pathological liar, who’s surrounded by enablers and millions of people that he’s whipped into a frenzy. I can’t highlight the danger of that enough, not just for all those priorities I just listed, but for keeping the lights on, for keeping the garbage trucks going, for staying out of a nuclear war. I mean, profound instability is mortally dangerous for every person on this planet. I am not just encouraging you to vote. That’s a must, because we are in a historic time. We’re seven days away from making history. So vote and knock on some doors, because you will remember these moments for the rest of your life. It’s that historical. Whatever happens, you'll remember where you were and what you did, and you'll be proud to say that you did something. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email To clarify, you’re urging young voters to vote based on facts, correct? I’m urging people to vote based on facts, for people who build a consensus and are surrounded by experts and are not just following the whim of one man and his imagination and…not somebody who leads with division. I mean, Trump openly denigrates half of Americans and half of American cities all the time. That’s not a leader for this country. You gotta be president for everyone. Celebrity endorsements can be powerful, so what would you say to students who are skeptical about the influence of celebrities in this election? There’s no reason that somebody needs to listen to me more than their neighbor, you know? Perhaps I can command a bit more attention, but that doesn’t mean that my opinion is any more valuable or wise. Looking back, what advice would you give to “young Adam Brody” when voting in a presidential election for the first time? Oh…do the midterms first. Do your local [elections]. Because the thing is, everyone gets involved in the presidential race, and it has a lot of impact. But if you want to impact your life the most, it’s like, who’s on the school board, who’s your local judge? Do local. Do local. Do local. Finally, if you could take one thing home from Madison, other than food, what would it be? [Laughs] I mean…a pet cow? Other than food, I don’t know what kind of goodies you have…Oh, the Electoral College votes! Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Thriller versus Alabama concludes winning weekend for Badgers Entering with a nine-game win streak, the Badgers held their own against their toughest competition to date, finishing the weekend 3-2. By Justin Alpert March 14, 2023 | 5:32pm CDT The Wisconsin Badgers softball team (13-8) went 3-2 at the Bevo Classic in Austin, Texas this weekend. Wisconsin split its first four games, beating Texas State (17-7) twice and losing both matchups with ninth-ranked Texas (21-3-1). The weekend culminated in a thrilling comeback win over 13th-ranked Alabama (20-6). Defensive issues returned to plague the Badgers, but they played well enough otherwise to keep pace with their best competition to date in 2023. Friday: 4-2 W vs. Texas State Gabi Salo opened the weekend with a gem for Wisconsin, but with the Badgers unable to solve Bobcat starter Jessica Mullins, the game remained scoreless after eight innings. Wisconsin then scored four runs in the top of the 10th with just one hit — a Christaana Angelopulos two-run single to make it 4-0 after an error, wild pitch, walk and hit batter had gotten the Badgers on the board. Salo allowed a couple unearned runs in the bottom of the inning. With two outs and the tying run up, Maddie Schwartz entered and secured the win with a strikeout. The 124-pitch, 8.2 inning outing continued Salo’s stellar 2023 campaign and eliminated any doubt about her belonging in the starting rotation. Friday: 5-1 L vs. Texas The Longhorns outhit the Badgers 10-2, but the game was close until Texas tagged Paytn Monticelli and Schwartz for three runs in the fifth inning. Monticelli (5-1) suffered her first loss in one of her worst outings thus far, allowing four runs (three earned) on six hits in four innings. Wisconsin’s only run came in the sixth, when second baseman Rylie Crane came around to score after a double — the team’s first hit of the game. Saturday: 4-3 W vs. Texas State Monticelli allowed three runs (one earned) in a 30-pitch, 1.2-inning start. Luckily, the Badgers started hot with four first-inning runs on four singles and a hit-by-pitch. Wisconsin’s bullpen, with 2.1 innings from Tessa Magnanimo (W, 1-1) and three from Schwartz (second save of 2023), held Texas State scoreless after Monticelli’s departure. Fascinatingly, each Badger arm threw exactly 30 pitches in the win. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Badger first baseman Katie Keller led the way with a double in a 3-for-3 performance. Shortstop Ellie Hubbard, who continues to improve at the plate, went 2-for-3 with a pair of RBI. Saturday: 7-4 L vs. Texas Molly Schlosser singled Kayla Konwent and Peyton Bannon home to give the Badgers a 1-0 first-inning lead. Things went downhill quickly for Wisconsin after that, though, largely due to defensive miscues. With two outs in the first, a Hubbard error opened the door for Texas’s Courtney Day to tie it with a two-run home run. Crane’s second-inning error led to two more unearned runs in a three-run frame for the Longhorns, who built a 5-2 lead. Salo’s tough-luck start ended after 1.2 innings with four unearned runs. Konwent hit a two-run shot in the fifth to bring Wisconsin within two, but Longhorn reliever Sophia Simpson entered for a three-inning, six-strikeout save to secure the win. Sunday: 7-6 W vs. Alabama Six lead changes highlighted a wild weekend finale versus the Crimson Tide. The game began in frustratingly familiar fashion for Wisconsin, as a Schlosser error led to an unearned run off Monticelli in her third start of the weekend. Wisconsin returned the favor in the fourth, when Skylar Sirdashney followed an error and a hit-by-pitch with a two-out, two-run double. The Tide responded in the bottom of the inning, though, regaining the lead and chasing Monticelli with a three-run home run. Crane and Angelopulos strung together two-out hits in a three-run fifth inning, which put the Badgers up 5-4. Alabama responded with a two-run shot, of course. Konwent’s second home run in as many games then put Wisconsin ahead for good. Schwartz (3-5) settled in after the fifth-inning home run and earned the victory with hitless sixth and seventh frames. Climbing the ranks Wisconsin’s 13-8 record may be too modest to justify a top-25 ranking at this point in the season. That said, the competitive showings versus ranked opponents suggested the 2023 Badgers can compete on a national level. The weekend would have been an even greater success if not for Wisconsin’s 11 errors in five games. Monticelli’s ERA rose to a disappointing 2.10 after her worst set of games to date. Still, the freshman has held her own against some of the nation’s best teams so far this year and should see no role reduction for now. As Salo’s sample size has grown, her performance hasn’t wavered. The sophomore boasts an absurd 0.68 ERA and 0.75 WHIP through 30.2 innings, and the impact of her emergence is twofold. For one, she’s delivering dominant outings like Friday’s versus Texas State, giving the Badgers a full game and then some to get their offense going. Also, Salo being a dependable starter allows coach Yvette Healy to use Schwartz primarily in a relief role, calling upon the trustworthy senior when Wisconsin needs her most. Wisconsin’s offense has benefited greatly from the development of the freshman Crane, who’s slashing .310/.375/.448 in 29 at-bats. The starting second-base job should be hers going forward, barring any major regression. Sirdashney’s surprising success as a leadoff hitter (.425 OBP), Keller’s continued excellence in the two-hole (.898 OPS) and Konwent’s usual power-hitting prowess (five home runs, 1.051 OPS) make the top of Wisconsin’s order a nightmare for opposing pitchers. After a mostly successful cross-country tour, the Badgers are finally ready to begin the Big Ten schedule. Their conference matchups kick off March 24-26 with a three-game set at Michigan State. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget
Emily Julka/The Daily Cardinal Photo by Emily Julka | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE A guide to fall trends as the seasons change As New York Fashion Week wraps up, The Daily Cardinal spotlights the upcoming fall trends you should look out for during this back-to-school season. By Hannah Lindow September 19, 2024 | 2:00am CDT Of all four seasons, fall fashion trends always seem to catch my eye the most. Every year, the possibilities of style choices seem overwhelming, and it seems impossible to figure out what the “cool girls” are wearing for back-to-school season. With New York Fashion Week officially over, and Pinterest overflowing with inspiration, I’ve created the perfect “go-to” list of the upcoming fall trends you need to keep your eye on. This year’s color palette: olive green, chocolate brown, burgundy red and butter yellow Carrying over from the summer, butter yellow is staying in the spotlight for fall. Mix and match any of the darker colors listed above with a jean or white, and you’ve got the perfect outfit color scheme for fall 2024. Although some of these colors have been in trend for a while, they are turning into staple and timeless colors that will elevate any outfit. Suede everything Last year’s material of choice was leather, this year you can add to your outfit with the help of suede. With accessories like boots and purses, and larger articles like oversized jackets, suede is the perfect way to spice up a look. Luckily, thrift stores are overflowing with suede so make sure to visit your local second-hand shop such as Goodwill or Ragstock. Denim on denim on denim Carrying over from the summer’s “coastal cowgirl aesthetic,” dark-wash denim is in. According to Glamour’s Jake Henry Smith, “labels like Schiaparelli, Moschino and Skall Studio” were showcasing their denim-packed looks on the runways this fall. You are guaranteed to find halter tops, button up jackets, long western skirts and the perfect boot cut jeans — all in denim. Big jumper and a long lacy skirt An overarching theme of this fall’s trends is a play on western style, and this outfit equation is no exception. Layering an oversized knit sweater over any long and flowy skirt creates the most comfortable (and fashionable) outfit. Playing around with see-through lace, silk or a classic cotton skirt can tailor this trend uniquely to you. Party animals Will we ever get tired of animal print? No: leopard print is here to stay for the fall season. The obvious option is to find a high-neck tank or the viral leopard print jeans. However, if you want to add a more subtle hint of animal print, there are other options. Talia Abbas, a senior shopping editor, told Vogue her plans to use “a patterned clutch, a silk scarf knotted around a bag handle, or a phone-hair flat to amp up a neutral look.” Your bag needs some jewels too Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email If you don’t want to add any more pieces to your closet, the easiest way to stay on trend this fall is by accessorizing your bag. Brands such as Coach and Anthropologie have charm options for everyone. Trying to save money? Plan a DIY night and create your own. Reuse your hair ribbon from last spring to add a little feminine touch to your bag strap or visit your local craft store and pick out beads galore. The biggest trend of this fall is being you. Take any of the trends on this year’s radar and make it your own. Adding your own personal touch is the best way to stay fashionable. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year
Tammy Baldwin speaks at the Obama-Walz campaign event on October 22, 2024. Photo by Mary Bosch | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Baldwin narrowly wins reelection bid against Republican Eric Hovde In a razor-thin race, U.S. Senator Tammy Baldwin secured victory against Eric Hovde in one of the most competitive 2024 Senate races. By Iain Chang November 6, 2024 | 9:46am CST U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin narrowly beat Republican challenger Eric Hovde on Tuesday, securing a third Senate term. “The people of Wisconsin have chosen someone who always puts Wisconsin first,” Baldwin said in a statement. As of 8:33 a.m. Wednesday, Baldwin secured around 27,000 more votes than Hovde in one of the 2024 elections' most competitive races. Wisconsin’s U.S. Senate race was tracked as one of the critical races in determining the post-election Senate majority. The October Marquette Law Poll had Baldwin leading Hovde 51% to 49%, six points less than her lead in August. Baldwin’s race was the seventh most expensive race in the nation, raising over $66 million between the two candidates. By the end of October, Baldwin managed to out-raise Hovde by $10 million in campaign contributions. However, Hovde outspent Baldwin by $6 million in TV advertisements between Oct. 14 and Election Day, according to the Associated Press. Baldwin outperformed Vice President Kamala Harris, who was losing her bid for the presidency to former President Donald Trump by more than 32,000 votes in the state. Earlier Tuesday, Baldwin told The Daily Cardinal she believed the record high early voter turnout was a good sign for her race. She said the reports of record early voter turnout has been “amazing” and believed it was a good sign for her race. Baldwin’s campaign focused heavily on restoring abortion rights, a critical issue among Wisconsin voters. When the Supreme Court ended constitutional protections for the procedure in June 2022, an 1849 law banning abortions with no exception for rape or incest went into effect in Wisconsin. Baldwin also focused her campaign on highlighting authorship of the Women’s Health Protection Act, a Senate bill that would restore nationwide abortion access and restore protections for abortion. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Iain ChangIain Chang is a senior staff writer at The Daily Cardinal covering state news and politics. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says
Courtesy of MGM Pictures ARTS The ‘Bottoms’ phenomenon: Why the indie film is resonating with audiences in Madison and elsewhere This film is very aware of its overexaggerated portrayal of high school and doesn't take itself too seriously. By Gabriella Hartlaub September 14, 2023 | 3:00am CDT My friends and I set off on a journey last weekend to see “Bottoms,” directed by Emma Seligman. The film's opening weekend was marked by disappointment for many people, including myself, as the film was only available in about 10 theaters nationwide, with the closest one to Madison being in Chicago. Despite its limited release, the film grossed over $450,000 in its opening weekend, a high number when the amount of theaters showing the film is factored in. Week two brought more theaters into the mix, leading me to the Marcus Palace Cinema in Sun Prairie. The movie itself had all the makings of a cult classic: up-and-coming actresses, a heartfelt coming-of-age story and, most notably, a semi-empty theater for the 6:30 p.m. showing. But what our theater lacked in numbers, it made up for in laughter. The first thing you should know about “Bottoms” is that it’s a gay movie. The film’s main characters, PJ (Rachel Sennot) and Josie (Ayo Edibiri), are out lesbians. It's PJ and Josie’s love for women which drives them to create a girls-only fight club so they can gain the attention of popular cheerleaders Brittany (Kaia Gerber) and Isabel (Havana Rose Liu). In many ways, “Bottoms” is your typical high school movie. The nerd intends to win the cheerleader away from her football quarterback boyfriend with the backdrop of an incredibly overhyped football game. And in a lot of other ways, it isn’t your typical high school movie. Even in 2023, it’s impressive to see two lesbian main characters — especially ones who are out like PJ and Josie — and to have the plot revolve around their romantic aspirations. There’s also a borderline copious amount of blood in this film, both in the fight club scenes and in the eventual final fight which takes place during the aforementioned football game. I won’t spoil anything else about it because it's truly something you have to see for yourself. This film is very aware of its overexaggerated portrayal of high school and doesn't take itself too seriously. In fact, you’d be hard pressed to find a moment where the film takes itself seriously at all. One of my complaints about the film is a seeming lack of accountability — both to itself and to its characters. We root for Josie and PJ throughout the film, but it’s hard not to find yourself wondering why they never face consequences for their actions. In the end, whenever or however you can see “Bottoms” — see “Bottoms”. More than anything else, this movie is fun. And if you won’t take my word for it, take the word of the woman in my theater who, by the end of the movie, had laughed so furiously she was all but out of breath. This movie is a great time. Once you see it, it’s easy to see why it’s as sought after as it is. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Gabriella HartlaubGabriella Hartlaub is the former arts editor for The Daily Cardinal. She has also written state politics and campus news. She currently is a summer reporting intern with Raleigh News and Observer. Follow her on Twitter at @gabihartlaub. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal THE BEET An ode to freedom (more lanes) Freedom is very easy to obtain. I do not make this request in vain. The NIMBYs will think this proposal profane. For the cars, who none are thinking of, it is humane. Please, for the love of God, just give us one more lane. By Omar Waheed March 21, 2024 | 2:00am CDT All articles featured in The Beet are creative, satirical and/or entirely fictional pieces. They are fully intended as such and should not be taken seriously as news. Start of the day The alarm was set for seven. I woke up at eight. I pressed snooze too many times, and now I’m going to be late. No time for breakfast. Not a full shower today. My shirt is a bit wrinkled, but I guess that’s okay. I expect traffic to be a nightmare, mentally it will cause me pain. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. Leave my apartment, pat my pockets, triple check the locks. Start my car, let out a deep sigh and affirm myself with “my life rocks.” Oh jeez. Oh man. I forgot my phone. Today is going to be scary. Turn on the radio instead of listening to my playlist. Traffic report tells me to be wary. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Roads are backed up. Every day feels the same. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. I attempt to turn out onto the street to a long wait. It’s 8:50 now, I’m going to be more than late. I need to come up with some excuse; we have a podcast taping this morning. Something grand and believable that makes waking up late not boring. Finally move onto the street to immediately have to stop. It’s making me feel insane. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. The commute Time’s continuously slipping, and whatever excuse I can come up with will be poor. Cars upon cars flooding the streets, to get over is a war. There are too many people. I tell myself thinking I’m not part of the problem. There’s a simple solution that can fix everything. I know what can solve them all. One more lane will make all the pain and strife disappear. But I’m worried about the NIMBYs and their refusal to hear any solution that would fix the city would be turned down again. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. Our cars are the ticket to living life in the city. Public infrastructure is okay, but Metro is frankly shitty. You tell me to just wait for the BRT, that will make everything better. But more buses and restricted lanes will cause cars to fetter. We can be so much freer if we use eminent domain. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. Wind blasts through my hair, endlessly I’ll pay for gas and maintenance because I don’t see another way. You mention walkable cities but think of the cars. Where will they go? Parking is already hard enough for my gas-guzzling Tahoe. Criminal speeding with poor visibility in the pouring rain. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. Lobby for more freedom I decided to be the change I want to see. I’ll go door-to-door knocking for neighbors to hear my plea. A Common Council meeting is where I’ll state my case. Register for public comment and cry for the need of more space. “Madison’s leaders,” after a 2:55 ode to cars I say, “we need to spend a—" Cut off. My time is up. My comment wasn’t pertinent to the agenda. Surely my passion for freedom will garner me fame. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. But yet there is a chance. This year is an election year, so I’ll throw in my hat. Since no one else will think of the cars, I’ll step up to bat. “Take down the parks, bike lanes and neighborhoods!” It sounds concerning to most, but I’m running for the public’s good. I will be a single-issue candidate with one thing centered for my campaign. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. I didn’t win. My cause fell on deaf ears. Now for the next two years, every driver will live in fear. As long as I breathe, my mission will be just. Next election cycle, I know what to do. It won’t be a bust. I promise to cut down on all of our commutes throughout Dane. I know what would fix this. Please just give us one more lane. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Conservative student discovers pleasure for the first time through sex education module Undercover at Mnookin’s UWPD party: 90 Zyns, ketamine and a hummus platter Vote me for ASM. I will add a Department of Efficiency and cut UHS
Courtesy of IES Abroad ARTS UW-Madison student wins grand prize at Study Abroad Film Festival Q&A with Sami Stidham on her short film, “Take The Goggles Off.” By Spencer Ball November 30, 2023 | 5:00am CST “They say that studying abroad changes you,” a voiceover begins in a University of Wisconsin-Madison student’s award-winning short film. “But what I did not expect to learn or realize is that I had been living but only half alive.” “Take The Goggles Off” is a short film by Sami Stidham, a senior at UW-Madison studying journalism and digital studies. The film centers around her semester abroad in Barcelona in the spring of 2023. Stidham traveled to Barcelona through IES Abroad, a leading nonprofit study abroad provider based in Chicago, IL. She was one of 13 semifinalists in this year's 9th Annual IES Abroad Study Abroad Film Festival. “Take The Goggles Off” won first place, earning Stidham the $1,500 Grand Prize as well as claiming the new $5,000 IES Abroad Barbara Bobrich Annual Scholarship for a future UW-Madison study abroad student in financial need. Stidham chronicles her explorations in rhythmic prose and striking imagery, and she expresses how living in a new world pushed her to appreciate beauty in the everyday. She encourages her audience not to become mindless in repeating the habitual and mundane. The compassionate and life-affirming film finds meaning and awe in little details and small moments. Courtesy of IES Abroad This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. How did you decide to make your film? I was studying in Barcelona through IES Abroad, and I found out a month-ish into my semester that they hosted a film festival competition every year. I'm getting a Digital Studies Certificate and, through that, I've gotten really into film and have fallen in love with it. I knew I wanted to find something to do a film on for the festival. How new was this filmmaking process for you? Was there anything that was harder than you were expecting? Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email I’ve done a fair amount of filmmaking for my classes, but nothing huge. Everything has been really short mini-documentaries, video stories and other one-minute projects, both for digital studies and for my journalism classes as well. My short film is actually the longest thing I've ever made. Writing the script was a little difficult because I wanted it all to rhyme. And then I also wanted to communicate specific things and include specific memories, and I had footage I really wanted to include. So that was difficult, to get it all to sound the way I wanted to sound while at the same time communicating the message I wanted to convey. Then, editing just took forever, because editing always does. But I really enjoy this stuff, so it was fun to do. I was really struck by the shot selection you chose to accompany the voiceover, and how that combination added to the message of the film. Did you plan to take those shots ahead of time, or was it a matter of looking through footage afterward and finding what fit? Both. There were a couple of shots or memories I recorded that I really wanted to include. And then there were other things where I didn't have planned out footage I wanted. A lot of it was just writing the script and then finding footage I thought fit. How did it feel to finally present your film at the festival? I am proud of it. There are always things that I would change about it, but I feel like that's always true for creative works. It's a message I really believe in, so I was really excited to have other people see it. But creative works are so subjective. It was nerve-wracking to have that be put out there. I got over that a little bit by the time the actual festival rolled around. I had to be a politician and ask all of my friends and family to go watch it and vote for it, so I got over a little bit of that like, “oh, go watch my short film.” I was really excited to have it out there, but definitely a little nervous to find out if I won as well. Courtesy of IES Abroad Were there any big elements that didn’t end up making the final cut? I went to London with a friend from Madison for a weekend, and on the flight back I ended up talking to the woman next to me. She was from Bulgaria and lived in Spain. I’m a camp counselor in the summer, and I had a little friendship bracelet — it was red, white and pink — on my water bottle. And this woman was like “Oh my gosh, is this from Martenitsa?” Martenitsa is a Bulgarian tradition where they make hair ties, bracelets and necklaces from red and white string twisted together. It’s something with spring renewal, and you wear it until you see your first sparrow or your first tree blooming. Then, you tie it to a tree, and it’s supposed to bring good luck and good fortune. I thought that was a really cool, unique experience. Then, a week later back in Spain, I was walking home from class. Right outside my host mom's apartment there were a bunch of trees with red and white string tied to them. I really wanted to include something about that, but it was hard to fit it in. And I could not figure out how to rhyme the word Martenitsa. So that ended up not getting in, but I still included the footage without the story. What were some of the lessons that you took away from the experience? I learned through my journalism classes that I don't want to be a traditional reporter. There are a lot of things that I would not jive with even in broadcast or film journalism. I just don't like having a new thing every day and having to do something more surface-level. The longest piece of one thing on broadcast news is two or three minutes. I really enjoy having one topic and getting a lot of time to really dive into it. That's why I want to go into documentaries and longer-form journalism. This experience has definitely been really helpful for that endeavor, I mean, the reception of it was really good. It seemed like a lot of people connected to it and liked it, which I was very honored by. More than anything, it's just given me some confidence. I'm graduating in the spring, and I'm going to have to figure out what to do with my life really soon. It's definitely helped me realize I'm on the right path, career-wise. Are there any documentary topics that you're really interested in or something you might want to explore in the future? You can probably tell from my film, but I love travel, and I love nature. I grew up camping and road tripping, and my parents are both pretty hippie-dippie. As a result, I feel a really strong connection to nature. Obviously, the environment and the climate are facing quite a bit of hardship right now, with climate change and all this stuff going on. So I am really interested in going into documentaries about the environment and what we can do to help. Finally, what’s your favorite memory from your semester abroad? I went to Italy for spring break with a group of friends, and we were in Rome for a couple days. We all toured the Colosseum, but I went on a different day because I booked my tickets too late. I ended up going alone to this tour of the Colosseum, and I met this older married couple on the tour. They were some of the most genuine and kind people I've ever met. And they had three kids of their own who are all grown up. We got to talking, and they seemed really interested in my life. I think they just noticed, “Here's this young girl, doing this thing on her own.” They almost became my adopted parents for the tour. I had a lot of experiences abroad where I was so astounded by the kindness and generosity of strangers. They were so sweet, they would always make sure that I had a spot at the front of the group so I could hear our tour guide better. They made sure I had water because it was hot and took pictures of me because my friends weren't with me. Then, at the end of the tour, they had this really sweet parental heart-to-heart with me, where they essentially were just like, “You have to go after the things that you want in life. Like if you want to live abroad, it's scary, but you just got to do it. You got to take that leap of faith, and your family and support system will always be there to back you up if things go wrong.” It was a really unique experience. And that literally will stay with me forever. “Take The Goggles Off” is available on YouTube. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Hailey Johnson | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Constrained by state law, Wisconsin cities struggle to raise enough money From limits on property tax increases to a near-statewide ban on local sales taxes, municipalities in Wisconsin have few options to bring in more revenue as service costs rise. By Joseph Panzer October 24, 2024 | 3:00am CDT As inflation has driven up the cost of services, Wisconsin’s local governments, including the city of Madison, find themselves constrained by state laws limiting how they can raise money. District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told The Daily Cardinal that current state budgets and tax laws dating back to former Gov. Scott Walker’s administration have made it harder for Madison to provide residents with essential services. “[City employees] haven’t always gotten the pay increases relative to inflation that they have deserved,” Govindarajan said. “The city has grown quite a lot since 2012, but we’re still at the same levels of service for trash collection, for example.” Despite these constraints, Govindarajan and other officials stressed that city leaders have not given up in their pursuit of increased benefits for Madison residents. GOP-controlled Legislature strikes down budgetary proposals Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway held a press conference Oct. 3 at the Madison Public Library with state lawmakers to demand greater funding for Dane County cities. Gov. Tony Evers’ 2023-25 budget proposal included a shared revenue distribution that would make the state give to municipalities a minimum of 95% of what they gave the previous year. Additionally, the proposal included a 5% increase in state payments for municipal services like police, waste disposal and utilities and a 4% increase in general transportation aids for both counties and municipalities. But the biennial budget passed by the Legislature did not include these increases in funding for shared revenue, leaving Dane County cities underfunded. This is a result of 2023 Act 12, which initially intended to give all municipalities more funding but has created a disparity between Madison and the rest of the state. City Communications Manager Dylan Brogan told the Cardinal Act 12 has changed “very little” in what Madison can achieve through state funds despite the fact that Madison has added 90,000 residents since 2000 and is the fastest-growing city in the state. “That’s a lot more people paying state sales and income tax — a portion of which is supposed to help fund local governments,” Brogan said. “In 2024, Madison receives just $29 per resident through the shared revenue program. The average for Wisconsin cities is $195.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email One particular impact of the shared revenue overhaul is that underfunded communities can begin to see cuts in the availability of important services, such as fire departments. Another impact of shared revenue decreasing is that it becomes harder for governments to hire public defenders and district attorneys at competitive salaries, according to Wisconsin Public Radio. This leads to a growing number of backlogged cases accumulating in the court system. Evers had previously pushed for a raise for public defenders and assistant DAs in his budget proposal before Republicans cut it. Raising revenues in municipalities is often difficult Beyond shared revenue from the state, a large part of Madison’s budget is funded by levying taxes. An estimated 71% of the city’s annual revenue comes through property taxes. “How the state government expects local governments to fund themselves is through the property tax,” Govindarajan said. “If local municipalities want to raise their budget, they are basically forced to ask taxpayers to increase their own taxes in order to pay for city services.” Wisconsin used to rely heavily on income and property taxes as a part of its revenue stream until the election of Walker in 2010 signaled a shift to fiscal conservatism and tax cuts. The cuts amounted to a 4.4% per capita reduction and created negative externalities for cities. “Walker basically cut aid to local governments and then also their ability to raise revenue,” Brogan said. “You used to be able to raise property taxes based on inflation and net new construction. Well, he took off the inflation part.” The Legislature’s budget-writing committee’s May 2011 legislation on property tax levy limits changed the minimum levy increase for inflation from 3% to 0%, prohibiting municipalities from increasing their base levies by more than one percentage that exceeded the local government’s total value of all taxable property. While the introduction of levy limits was a response to a then-contemporary growth in municipal tax rates, the loss of these minimum limits on levies has led to low-growth municipalities being unable to keep pace with inflation, according to the Wisconsin Policy Forum, a nonpartisan policy research organization. Brogan underscored the city of Monona’s Nov. 5 referendum on instituting a one-time $3 million increase to its property tax levy as an example of a city struggling to keep up with costs. The 2024 Wisconsin Department of Revenue report found that Monona’s levy limit is only 0.45%. “How in the world are they going to be able to keep up with those costs when their ability to raise the property tax levy can never keep up?” Brogan said. “That’s something that hopefully the state Legislature is going to be addressing at some point, and that just is the tip of the iceberg of the revenue restrictions.” In his 2023-25 budget proposal, Evers suggested allowing municipalities greater privilege with selecting their own sales tax — known as the local option sales tax — giving Milwaukee County the ability to impose an additional 1% and other counties an additional 0.5% to their base. But the budget passed does not contain these measures. Rhodes-Conway named a local sales tax option as one of the items that would help Dane County communities secure the funds necessary to avoid cutting services during her Oct. 3 press conference. Partisan divides and next steps for cities When the biennial budget passed in 2023, Democrats unilaterally objected to it with no party members voting in support. One provision that Democrats took issue with was the institution of a tax cut when the state was in possession of a $7 billion budget surplus. “Republicans have been in charge of the Legislature for 14 years now,” Brogan told the Cardinal. “Gov. Evers has proposed budgets that treat cities like Madison a lot better, but the Republicans just ripped that up and passed their own budget.” To combat a budget shortfall, the Nov. 5 election in Madison will feature a $22 million funding referendum on the ballot to increase the city’s property tax levy above state levels. “We specifically came up with that number because that’s what it takes for us to continue our services,” Govindarajan said. “If the referendum passes, we’re not adding anything new. If we do not get that $22 million, we have to cut services.” Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Broday and Bryant: As part of a national campus tour in support of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama, actors Adam Brody and Joy Bryant spoke to students at Memorial Union Wednesday. Photo by Katie Gibbs | and Katie Gibbs The Daily Cardinal ARTS Q&A: ‘We're seven days away from making history’: Actor Adam Brody rallies UW-Madison voters After an enthusiastic visit to the University of Wisconsin-Madison, actor and activist Adam Brody shares his insights on why young voters are crucial in shaping America's future. By Alaina Walsh October 29, 2024 | 6:30am CDT Actor Adam Brody, known for his role as Seth Cohen on the Fox series "The O.C" and most recently as Noah on "Nobody Wants This," hosted a student meet-and-greet on behalf of the Harris-Walz campaign in Madison on Sunday, where he spoke about Madison’s pivotal role in what he called “a historical election.” The Wisconsin Democratic Party hosted the event to encourage University of Wisconsin-Madison students to vote early, backing Vice President Kamala Harris for the upcoming Presidential election. Following the event, Brody spoke privately with small groups of students about their hopes for the election’s outcome. The Daily Cardinal spoke with Brody about why he thought Madison, specifically UW-Madison students, are important in this election, advice he’d give to first-time voters and what he’d take home as a keepsake from Wisconsin. This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity. How are you feeling about being in Madison? Lovely, enthused, energized and comforted by seeing so many energetic, enthusiastic people who are passionate and hopeful. Why do you think it is so important to talk to University of Wisconsin-Madison students specifically? Well, starting wider and zooming in, Wisconsin is a swing state, and I think students in general, with good reason, tend to lean more Democratic. At the same time, I thought that the participation wasn't going to be as strong. So there's a lot of room there to grow, to activate, to motivate and also they seem to be the people that are interested in talking to me. What would you say to students that are undecided about voting? There’s a list of priorities, policies, positions and rights that I personally care about. Perhaps we share these values or outlooks in common or not — reproductive freedom, the climate crisis, the homelessness problem and the lack of housing, the gun violence epidemic, democracy abroad. These are all big issues. But I would say, regardless of how you feel about any of those…we have a man who’s close to being in office, who is a pathological liar, who’s surrounded by enablers and millions of people that he’s whipped into a frenzy. I can’t highlight the danger of that enough, not just for all those priorities I just listed, but for keeping the lights on, for keeping the garbage trucks going, for staying out of a nuclear war. I mean, profound instability is mortally dangerous for every person on this planet. I am not just encouraging you to vote. That’s a must, because we are in a historic time. We’re seven days away from making history. So vote and knock on some doors, because you will remember these moments for the rest of your life. It’s that historical. Whatever happens, you'll remember where you were and what you did, and you'll be proud to say that you did something. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email To clarify, you’re urging young voters to vote based on facts, correct? I’m urging people to vote based on facts, for people who build a consensus and are surrounded by experts and are not just following the whim of one man and his imagination and…not somebody who leads with division. I mean, Trump openly denigrates half of Americans and half of American cities all the time. That’s not a leader for this country. You gotta be president for everyone. Celebrity endorsements can be powerful, so what would you say to students who are skeptical about the influence of celebrities in this election? There’s no reason that somebody needs to listen to me more than their neighbor, you know? Perhaps I can command a bit more attention, but that doesn’t mean that my opinion is any more valuable or wise. Looking back, what advice would you give to “young Adam Brody” when voting in a presidential election for the first time? Oh…do the midterms first. Do your local [elections]. Because the thing is, everyone gets involved in the presidential race, and it has a lot of impact. But if you want to impact your life the most, it’s like, who’s on the school board, who’s your local judge? Do local. Do local. Do local. Finally, if you could take one thing home from Madison, other than food, what would it be? [Laughs] I mean…a pet cow? Other than food, I don’t know what kind of goodies you have…Oh, the Electoral College votes! Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
The Wisconsin Well Woman Program provides free breast and cervical cancer screenings for individuals with limited income and little or no health insurance. Photo by Max Homstad | The Daily Cardinal LIFE & STYLE Breast cancer awareness must last beyond one month of the year By Hallie Albert November 14, 2024 | 2:00am CST As breast cancer awareness month concludes, I want to remind you that awareness and advocacy should not be limited to just one month. Breast cancer does not follow a calendar, and neither should our efforts to spread awareness. Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers among women in the United States. Approximately “240,000 women are diagnosed annually, and 42,000 women die from the disease each year,” according to the CDC. These statistics are intense, but they also prove the need for education and support among our world. Breast cancer advocacy holds a special place in my heart, as both of my grandmothers have battled and survived breast cancer. I remember visiting my grandmother during one of her treatments. Witnessing her pain and exhaustion was heartbreaking, but her resilience and determination was incredibly inspiring. My grandma was lucky enough to catch her cancer early and had a wonderful support system by her side throughout the treatment process. I couldn’t help but think about the thousands of people who do not have a support system or adequate finances to support themselves, or do not catch symptoms early enough. As college students, we need to better educate ourselves on the facts and statistics of breast cancer, warning signs and precautionary measures women should be taking. This knowledge can save someone’s life as catching breast cancer early tremendously raises survival rates. Ribbon of Hope, an organization based here in Wisconsin, was founded by a group of breast cancer survivors and offers financial and emotional support to individuals undergoing breast cancer treatments. As survivors themselves, they understand the physical and emotional impact breast cancer in itself can have on an individual, which fuels their mission to help others. Their goal is to provide adequate support so patients can focus on fighting cancer, minimizing other stressful worries such as medical bills. Breast cancer awareness month is just one example of how our society confines advocacy for certain health causes to a single month — heart health in February, mental health in May. While these months bring awareness to specific diseases and circumstances, just like breast cancer, these conditions do not adhere to a calendar. Sadly, the reality is that diseases such as breast cancer affect individuals every day. With this, I ask you to do your research, learn facts, statistics and share your knowledge with friends and family. When you become aware of an “awareness month,” challenge yourself to sit down and learn information. Do not just post an Instagram picture because everyone else is. If you are able, reach out to organizations such as Ribbon of Hope on how to get involved because you can make a positive impact in the lives of others. Advocacy, education and support must be ongoing in order to make a lasting impact on our society. We are in control of our future, so let's advocate, let’s research, let’s come together to make a lasting difference — no matter what month it is. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Success looks different for everyone. For me, it’s about trusting the process What I learned from college struggles: It’s all about perspective Post-election slump: Finding motivation in a time of uncertainty
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal MEN'S BASKETBALL Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers are now a long way away from their season-opening eight-game winning streak. By Jacob Szczap December 13, 2024 | 10:50am CST With an 86-80 loss to the Illinois Fighting Illini in Champaign, Illinois on Tuesday night, No. 20 Wisconsin has now lost three straight games. After starting the season with eight straight wins, the Wisconsin Badgers men’s basketball team finds itself on a streak of a different kind. In front of a jam-packed State Farm Center, Wisconsin battled hard but couldn't quite get over the hump, falling to 8-3 and 0-2 in conference play for the first time since the 2002-03 season. The loss marks nine straight to Illinois. Throughout the night, Wisconsin’s defense was unable to contain Illinois’ frontcourt trio of Kasparas Jakucionis, Tre White and Kylan Boswell. Freshman guard Jakucionis was the star of the night, leading the Illini with a career-high 24 points on 8-15 shooting with 4-8 from three alongside six assists and five rebounds. White contributed 23 points, shooting 8-15 and putting in nine points from the line, while Boswell added 19 points and six assists. Together they scored 66 of Illinois’ 86 points. Wisconsin’s defensive Achilles’ heel came from its inability to close out defensive rebounds. The Badgers allowed Illinois 16 offensive rebounds, which the Illini capitalized on with 15 second-half points. Altogether, the Illini out-rebounded Wisconsin 40-29. Offensively, the Badgers were led by forward Nolan Winter, whose aggressiveness led him to 15 points on 5-11 shooting while snatching seven rebounds. Winter guided Wisconsin’s offensive to begin the second half, almost single-handedly keeping the game close. He scored eight of the Badgers’ first 10 second-half points and accounted for the team’s only field goals in an over six-minute stretch. “He’s a really good player, and I think he’s just scratching the surface of where he can be,” head coach Greg Gard said of Winter after the game. Gard went on to praise his aggressiveness and willingness to score in multiple ways, including from three, where Winter hit twice in seven tries. Meanwhile, Gard couldn’t offer the same praise for his other forward, seven-footer Steven Crowl, who finished with nine points but no rebounds in only 19 minutes. “How do you have no rebounds?” Gard questioned in the post game Guard John Tonje added an inefficient 15 points on 15 shots, with four rebounds and three assists, while guard Max Klesmit added 13 points on 4-10 shooting. In a close first half, Wisconsin was disadvantaged by foul troubles from three starters — John Blackwell, Klesmit and Crowl — forcing Gard to look to his bench, where he received contributions from Kamari McGee, Carter Gilmore, Xavier Amos and Jack Janicki. Despite such heavy first-half bench minutes, Wisconsin was able to stay in the game, going into the half trailing 39-35. In the second half, Wisconsin reached the bonus quickly, with 14:42 remaining. But with such offensive leverage, the Badgers seemingly forgot they had to score from places other than the free-throw line. From 16:32 left in the game to 11:08 left, Wisconsin didn’t convert a field goal, allowing the game to turn from a tie into a 10-point Illinois advantage. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The Badgers kept battling, and with 8:42 left in the game, Wisconsin was within four points. Again, Illinois stretched its lead to 10. but Wisconsin continued to fight. With 2:51 remaining, a Winter three-pointer made the game 74-70. But for the Badgers, a White tip-in and costly Klesmit three-point foul ultimately did them in. While Wisconsin kept the game interesting until the final seconds, Illinois remained in control for the remainder of the game. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Badgers sports didn’t disappoint in 2024. Here are some highlights
Wisconsin football's head coach Luke Fickell at the first home game of the 2023 season. Photo by Evan Halpop | The Daily Cardinal FOOTBALL Column: Fickell showed no improvement in year two. Is it time for the Badgers to move on? The Badgers are inconsistent and underperforming, does the problem run deeper than Luke Fickell? By Tomer Ronen November 27, 2024 | 5:10pm CST When Athletic Director Chris McIntosh and the Wisconsin Badgers announced Luke Fickell as their next head coach, there was optimism, pride and — with a 12-team college football playoff on the horizon — hope. But two years later, it would be hard to say they’ve made much progress even if they beat Minnesota on Friday. Paul Chryst, who led the Badgers to three New Year’s Six bowls in eight seasons, was fired from the head position following a 2-3 start to the 2022 season, on the heels of an embarrassing loss to Illinois at Camp Randall, and it was absolutely the right decision at the time. His replacement, interim head coach Jim Leonhard, led the team to a 4-3 record the rest of the way, but another home loss, this time to Minnesota, brought the Axe to his short-lived time as the face of the program. I’m not here to argue they should have stayed. The opportunity to hire the hotshot coach from Cincinnati was an opportunity the Badgers couldn’t pass up, but so far Fickell has seemed in over his head. Last week, Wisconsin was embarrassed at Memorial Stadium by a Nebraska team that hadn’t beaten them since the Bret Bielema era. Two weeks ago, the team suffered a loss full of excuses — including the firing of offensive coordinator Phil Longo — to the No. 1 team in the country. Before that, a disaster in Iowa City and a second half collapse against Penn State. TOGETHER, the losses mark the first four-game skid for the Badgers since 2008. A loss Friday would be the longest winless streak for the Badgers since 1991, Barry Alvarez’s second season as head coach. Pointing fingers So who’s to blame? At face value, it seems Fickell is throwing Longo, who led the Badgers to an underwhelming 97th national scoring and 102nd passing rankings through the first 10 games, under the bus. Fickell’s most stout defenders will offer him a mulligan, with injuries to quarterbacks Tanner Mordecai last year and Tyler Van Dyke this year unceremoniously thrusting Braedyn Locke into the starting role in the biggest spots. The Badgers have even shown the ability to compete. They led the Nittany Lions at halftime, and they were just a missed call away from taking down the mighty Ducks. But looking at the game as a whole makes it clear: the Badgers have been inconsistent, outplayed and outcoached by their opposition week after week. Ultimately, it comes down to Fickell. EVERYONE knows Fickell — who told fans he had just one goal “to play for a championship” at his introductory press conference — is the face of this program. His grit, toughness and history of success with Cincinnati made him feel like a perfect fit to carry on a Wisconsin legacy. Instead, he’s shifted it in the opposite direction. The Badgers have been at their best when they’ve had a clear identity: running the ball and playing good defense. Under Fickell’s command, they’ve fallen to the middle of the pack in both, 52nd and 64th, respectively. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email As football shifts to a quarterback’s game, the Badgers have tried to become a team that relies heavily on the spread formations and airing it out, something they unsuccessfully tried to ACHIEVE through Longo’s Air Raid offense. In 2022 under Chryst, the Badgers ranked 117th in passing attempts. Last year, they skyrocketed to 19th. With future NFL running back Braelon Allen still in the picture, rushing attempts dropped from 45th to 72nd. A clear shift in philosophy. On defense, Fickell’s side of the ball, the team has dropped from 17th in points allowed per game under Chryst in 2022 to 52nd this year and from 10th in yards allowed per game to a measly 39th. Shouldn’t you excel at your specialty? Maybe we’ve set expectations too high. Winning in what is now a “Power Two conference” is difficult, and past Badgers teams were consistently able to overperform, courtesy of the now defunct Big Ten West division. Maybe fans need to tone it down a little. Maybe home against Northwestern really is a tough matchup. South Dakota is an FCS school, but they were ranked No. 6 after all, so it’s a quality win! We might need to take off those rose-colored glasses because the schedules don’t get easier from here. What’s next? With Wisconsin on the hook for $40 million if Fickell is fired at the end of the season — a number likely out of McIntosh’s budget — getting rid of him is likely off the table for now. Instead, the expensive head coach will seek a new front man on the offensive side of the ball when the season draws to a close, despite his insistence that he doesn’t think “it really is important as to who is calling [the offense].” Whoever the Badgers hire for their offensive coordinator spot will signify the direction the organization is headed. A run-the-rock, three-yards-and-a-cloud-of-dust signing will signify the return to ways of old. A progressive, air-it-out, spread-offense addition will show a return to the Longo style of play, leaving fans hoping to squeeze out its full potential. On the other side of the ball, Fickell will have to do better. Two Rivals four-star defensive backs from the 2024 class should see increased playing time in their sophomore years, and a spread of three-star players with an extra year under their belt will look to help push the Badgers to the next level. But for Badgers fans, a glance at the 2025 schedule likely elicits a sigh. Wisconsin is scheduled to head to Tuscaloosa to face Alabama before heading into a Big Ten schedule that includes trips to Indiana, Michigan and Oregon and play host to Ohio State at Camp Randall. But it’s MORE than just gloom and doom for the team in cardinal and white. Fickell has recruited well on paper, with 2024 and 2025 recruiting classes ranked in the top 20 by Rivals. And the Badgers have hope under center, with four-star Florida recruit quarterback Carter Smith — whose classification as a “dual-threat” quarterback has fans reminiscing about Russell Wilson — announcing his commitment to the 2025 class earlier this week. With teams like Indiana, Colorado and Arizona State turning things around in the blink of an eye, it’s fair for Badger fans to have hope. And with revenue sharing on the horizon, the landscape of college football will once again see a massive shift. But leaving fans optimistic about teenagers who may not touch the field for another two or three years only works if the Badgers can pull it together, and a potential end to the famed 22-year bowl game streak already has them antsy. Fickell will need his T.E.A.M. to exceed expectations to make it out of 2025 unscathed. Perhaps fans need to temper theirs. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Tomer RonenTomer Ronen is the Features Editor for the Daily Cardinal. He has covered protests, state politics, sports and more. Follow him on Twitter at @TRonen22. More Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget
Photo by Katie Schiedt | The Daily Cardinal STATE NEWS Missing Wisconsin man faked his death, fled to Europe, investigators say After almost two months of searching, Green Lake County investigators think Watertown man Ryan Borgwardt, who was reported missing in August, fled to Eastern Europe. By Jake Piper November 19, 2024 | 2:00am CST A Wisconsin man who went missing after kayaking and was presumed dead actually faked his death and fled to Eastern Europe, abandoning his wife and three children, investigators said at a Nov. 8 press conference. Ryan Borgwardt of Watertown, about 40 miles northeast of Madison, was reported missing on Aug. 12. Later that day, investigators found a capsized kayak and lifejacket in the middle of Green Lake. A vehicle, fishing rod and wallet belonging to Borgwardt were all left at the park nearby. What followed was an extensive 54 days of investigation involving specialized sonar equipment, a dive team and cadaver dogs. With no luck, the investigation team, led by Green Lake County Sheriff Mark Podoll, widened their search, finding something they “didn’t expect.” A break in the investigation came when officials were informed that Canadian border patrol officers had looked up Borgwardt’s name on Aug. 13, the day after he was reported missing. Borgwardt had reported his passport as missing in May and was issued a new one prior to his disappearance. But when Borgwardt’s wife searched their house, she easily found his old passport, leading Podoll to believe Borgwardt crossed the border with his newly issued second passport. Investigators obtained a laptop belonging to Borgwardt and learned that he had planned to flee to Europe, with evidence such as taking out a life insurance policy, making inquiries about moving funds to foreign bank accounts, airline gift cards and “communication” with a woman in Uzbekistan, Podoll said. "Due to these discoveries of the new evidence, we were sure that Ryan was not in our lake," Podoll said at the Nov. 8 press conference. Now, Podoll said he and his team are “shifting gears,” issuing a plea to both the public and Borgwardt for any information they might have about his disappearance. “Ryan, If you’re hearing this, I plead that you contact us or your family,” Podoll said. “There’s a family that wants their daddy back.” Keith Cormican, founder of Bruce’s Legacy, a volunteer search team that aided in the search for Borgwardt, found the search and subsequent results especially “disheartening,” telling CBS 12 that he had spent about 23 days overall underwater during search rescue efforts. “He definitely cost us a lot of grief, a lot of money, repairs and equipment. I just hope he comes forward sooner rather than later so the family can move on,” Cormican told The Associated Press. At this time, Podoll said he doesn’t know what kinds of charges would be placed against Borgwardt or the cost the search incurred on local taxpayers, but he said the community showed support for the investigation efforts by providing investigators and volunteers food and gift cards. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Photo by Meghan Spirito | The Daily Cardinal CITY NEWS Madison passes property tax referendum On election night, the City of Madison voted to accept a referendum that will raise the property tax levy. By Joseph Panzer November 5, 2024 | 11:43pm CST The city of Madison’s $22 million funding referendum passed Tuesday night. The referendum will raise property taxes above their state limit to close a $22 million deficit for 2025. The deficit would have caused Madison to encounter difficulties with paying the salaries of city employees and continuing providing services to residents. State law prevents cities from raising income taxes or local sales tax to counter shortfalls. The 2023-25 biennial budget passed by the Republican-controlled Legislature contained no increases in funding for shared revenue in Wisconsin, leaving Dane County cities underfunded compared to the rest of the state. Officials in the city government have previously told The Daily Cardinal the blame for this deficit lies with the Legislature and the shift to fiscal conservatism that began under Gov. Scott Walker’s administration in 2010. Wisconsin cities have been unable to increase their tax levies in response to inflation by more than one percent of the city’s total taxable property value since May 2011. "I am particularly grateful that we do not have to consider cuts to essential services that students rely on, such as late-night and weekend busses and public safety," District 8 Ald. MGR Govindarajan told the Cardinal. "These are services that students rely on daily, and I will not let the city compromise on them." Madison is one of the fastest growing cities in the state, according to the Wisconsin Department of Administration, creating concern that an inability to secure funds will result in hiring problems in the city. Though the city has faced a budget deficit for 14 years, the 2025 budget gap would have been the largest seen in years, Madison Finance Director David Schmiedlicke previously told the Cardinal. The average Madison homeowner will pay around $240 more in property taxes annually as a result of this referendum’s passage. Addressing a crowd of reporters at City Hall, Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway gave closing remarks on concerns from residents about the tax hike. “It’s not easy to vote to raise your own taxes, and we should never have been put in this position by the state Legislature,” Rhodes-Conway said. “It’s my commitment to the community that we as the city of Madison — and hopefully in coalition with other cities around the state and other folks who care about cities — will work with the state Legislature to get the investment that we need from the state of Wisconsin into cities.” Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows Smokey Bear lights up Capitol tree honoring Wisconsin’s state parks UW-Madison opens investigation into SJP, considering sanctions for alleged Expressive Activity Policy violations
Photo by Taylor Wolfram | The Daily Cardinal SOFTBALL Is everything bigger in Texas? Badgers head to Austin for Bevo Classic Wisconsin will spend their weekend in Austin with matchups against No. 10 Texas, No. 9 Alabama and Texas State. By Annika Bereny March 10, 2023 | 12:04am CST This weekend, the Wisconsin Badgers (10-6) will head south to Austin, Texas for the Bevo Classic, where they will face off against No. 10 Texas, No. 9 Alabama and Texas State. The Badgers will enter Austin hot, coming off of an eight game win streak that has them undefeated since Feb. 19 against Louisville. They most recently picked up an early conference win against Big Ten rival Indiana, beating them 12-1 in Bloomington. The game against the Hoosiers marked Wisconsin’s widest margin of victory all season, adding some extra momentum to their win streak Wisconsin will play their first game of the invitational against Texas State (16-5), where 2022 Sun Belt Freshman of the Year Ciara Trahan leads the Bobcats in hits with 27 on the season and a .386 batting average. Jessica Mullins is expected to start in the circle for Texas State, where she holds a formidable 1.22 ERA over 63 innings pitched. The Bobcats are projected to finish the season second in the Sun Belt, according to a preseason coaches poll. During their Friday faceoff against Texas (18-2-1), the player to watch for the Longhorns will be freshman shortstop Viviana Martinez from Tolleson, Arizona, who leads the team in hits and is currently batting an impressive .524 on the season. Martinez has recorded a hit in all but two of her 21 starts this season. Wisconsin, however, has committed zero errors in their last three games, and the infield will likely be wary of Martinez as a threat at the plate. The Longhorns entered 2023 with unfinished business after making it to the Women’s College World Series final as an unseeded dark horse, nearly winning the National Championship. Texas’ path to Oklahoma City went through No. 13 Washington and No. 4 Arkansas before defeating No. 7 Oklahoma State to advance to the finals. Earlier that season, Texas was the first team to beat softball powerhouse Oklahoma, snapping their 40-game win streak spanning more than 300 days. The three game series for the Championship ended poorly for the Longhorns, though, as Oklahoma avenged their prior loss with 16-1 and 10-5 wins to become back-to-back champions. Last year’s loss is likely fresh in their minds as they chase another bid to Oklahoma City this season and another shot at becoming national champions. In their Sunday matchup against Alabama (19-3), all eyes will be on the Wisconsin offense as they attempt to score against fifth-year senior Montana Fouts, a powerhouse in the circle for the Alabama defense and the most recent SEC Pitcher of the Week. Fouts is coming off a week where she threw 19 shutout innings and pitched her third perfect game — and the program’s eighth. For the Crimson Tide, Kenleigh Cahalan leads the team in batting average, hitting .400 on the season. Ashley Prange is another face to look out for at the plate, leading the team with eight home runs. Cahalan and Prange are eager to hit, though, having eight and six strikeouts on the season, respectively. The Badgers and likely starter in the circle, Gabi Salo, can capitalize on this vulnerability when they face Alabama. For Wisconsin, Katie Keller and Kayla Konwent are expected to continue their dominance, as the two lead the team in batting average at .357 and .348, respectively. Freshman Rylie Crane will also look to extend her hot streak after going 6-8 in last weekend’s Hoosier Classic. In the circle, Salo will aim to build upon her strong showing last weekend, where she recorded a career-high 11 strikeouts against Purdue Fort Wayne, significantly contributing to her 0.69 ERA. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email The 2023 Badgers will look to improve upon last year’s 30-21 season that ended against No. 14 Florida in the Gainesville Regional. Already they are showing progress, handing two resounding defeats to Georgia Tech in the ACC/Big Ten challenge who they narrowly defeated in the first round of last year’s tournament, 7-6, to survive elimination. The Bevo Classic will begin on Friday, March 10, with Wisconsin playing their first game against Texas State at 11 a.m. CT. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Annika BerenyAnnika Bereny is a Senior Staff Writer and the former Special Pages Editor for The Daily Cardinal. She is a History and Journalism major and has written in-depth campus news, specializing in protest policy, free speech and historical analysis. She has also written for state and city news. Follow her on Twitter at @annikabereny. More Wisconsin men’s basketball loses third straight game, falling to Illinois 86-80 Badgers QB Braedyn Locke enters NCAA transfer portal Second half dooms Wisconsin at Marquette, falling 88-74 in intense in-state matchup
Photo by Courtesy of Paramount Pictures. ARTS ‘Transformers One’ is the origin story we didn’t ask for but are pleased to have This action-packed thrill ride was a win for the Transformers franchise. By Oliver Ehrhardt October 2, 2024 | 2:00am CDT “Transformers One” is the perfect origin story and change of pace for the Michael Bay Transformers films. Since "Transformers: Dark of the Moon," the Transformers franchise has struggled to keep a linear story while delivering quality action sequences. Installments like “Transformers: The Last Knight” and “Transformers: Rise of the Beasts” have been underwhelming, especially after the first three films were so creative and nostalgic. Safe to say I wasn’t really looking forward to or expecting another Transformers movie, but “Transformers One” was surprisingly unique, original and funny, while handling complex themes like the difficulties of dealing with power. “Transformers One” is an origin story taking place on the planet Cybertron, the homeworld of the Transformers. Though they are sworn enemies in the Michael Bay movies, we see the early friendship between Optimus Prime and Megatron who mine for energon after the Matrix of Leadership was lost in battle, which gives life to Cybertron and is possessed by the leader of Cybertron. The main story follows Optimus Prime and Megatron, who were then known as Orion Pax and D-16 respectively, as they search for the Matrix of Leadership and discover a hidden secret among their home world. “Transformers One” has a simple yet entertaining plotline: venture out and find an artifact that will restore life to Cybertron. The third act is by far the best and most entertaining sequence of this movie. Everything unfolds so quickly, and we see Optimus Prime in true Optimus Prime form: taking down everybody around him with style and confidence. “Transformers One” is directed by Josh Cooley, who is no stranger to animated films. He directed Pixar’s “Inside Out” and “Toy Story 4,” bringing the same amount of creativity and humor to “Transformers One” while keeping the story moving. Compared to the chaotic nature of Michael Bay’s Transformers, this movie doesn’t take itself too seriously and has a very easy storyline to follow. One of the strongest parts of this movie is the way it focuses on the relationship between Orion Pax and D-16. You feel a sense of sorrow and heartbreak as the story unfolds, and I couldn’t help but feel choked up at some parts toward the end. We spend a majority of the movie getting close with these characters, which makes the ending that much more tragic. Near the end of this movie, we see two ways of thinking about what to do with the power Orion Pax and D-16 eventually get—compassion vs. domination. Optimus Prime stands for sympathy and autonomy, as the name “autobots” suggests, while Megatron wants total control and desires power for its own sake. In essence, the movie explores how to deal with enormous amounts of power and the choices made when given that power. This movie made some interesting but effective casting choices. It took a bit of getting used to hearing Chris Hemsworth’s voice for Optimus Prime, but by the end he did a great job. Other notable names include Brian Tyree Henry as D-16, Scarlett Johansson as Elita-1, a female transformer who joins Orion Pax and D-16 on their journey and Keegan-Michael Key as B-127, or Bumblebee. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email I absolutely loved Keegan-Michael Key in his role. He voiced Bumblebee so well and he was hilarious. There were some standout moments from him especially and it’s very believable that this is the same character we see in the Michael Bay movies. I laughed anytime he referred to himself as “badassatron,” trying to make the nickname stick, although it never did. I have to admit I started rewatching all the Transformers movies, and the nostalgia is starting to hit. I really liked some of the callbacks to the Bay films, like introductions to Decepticons Soundwave and Shockwave and also showing how Starscream got his unique voice. I loved this movie, and I am hoping it will get even better on rewatch. Rating: 4.5/5 stars “Transformers One” is now playing in theaters. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
Tommo Grass (left) and Memphis Belle Cleveland (right) appearing at the premiere of Martin Scorsese's film "Killers of the Flower Moon" in Sun Prairie, WI. Photo by Anna Kleiber | The Daily Cardinal ARTS Indigenous actors in ‘Killers of the Flower Moon’ praise film’s depiction of Osage tragedy Martin Scorsese’s latest film is a devastating snapshot of white American greed and its lasting impact on Native Americans. By Anna Kleiber November 2, 2023 | 4:00am CDT “Killers of the Flower Moon” depicts a haunting narrative known all too well by Indigenous tribes across the country. Based on a 2017 nonfiction book of the same name, Martin Scorcese’s film “Killers of the Flower Moon” unravels a deeply unsettling chapter of American history in painstaking detail, leaving audiences reflecting on the numerous atrocities depicted in the three-and-a-half hour film. The film depicts the dark and complex history of the Osage Nation and the gruesome murders of their people at the hands of white outsiders who sought to gain the Osage’s newfound wealth after the discovery of oil on their reservation. Lily Gladstone (Mollie Kyle) stars alongside Leonardo DiCaprio (Ernest Burkhart) and Robert De Niro (William “King” Hale) to bring this haunting story to life. The film introduces viewers to the Osage Nation through the eyes of an outsider, Ernest Burkhart, who moved in with his uncle William “King” Hale after serving in World War Ⅰ. Ernest’s relationship with Mollie Kyle, an Osage woman whose family owns oil headrights, slowly introduces the audience to the Osage people and their ways of life. Gladstone’s performance dazzled the audience. Her way of speech was careful and deliberate, relying on facial expressions to convey what was left unsaid. Throughout the film, Mollie’s voice-over narration gives the audience real and raw insight into her anguish as, one by one, she loses family members at the hands of greedy and corrupt forces outside of her control. “Evil crowds my heart,” she narrates at one point in the film as she prepares to bury yet another family member. “They say I ought to kill these white men who killed my family.” Mollie’s voice-over narrations tell a story Mollie dares not speak aloud. As the film progresses, Mollie’s narration communicates her fear and anxiety as those around her continue to be murdered in brutal and deeply unsettling ways, taking her sense of safety in her home and community. Ernest’s one instance of voice-over narration in the film stands in stark contrast to Mollie’s. He recites some lines from a book about Osage culture over a montage that depicts him and other white men robbing an Osage couple at gunpoint. “Can you spot the wolves in this picture?” the narration closes out, hinting at what is to come later on in the movie. By the end of the film, the audience feels as though they witnessed Mollie’s melancholy and pain firsthand, almost as if they knew her and her struggles on an intimate level. While the film closes with an aerial shot of the Osage today, dancing in their traditional attire to the beat of a drum, this bright and colorful scene reminds the audience of the strength and resilience of the Osage people and other Indigenous tribes across the country. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Law firm Quarles and Brady sponsored a premiere of the film in Sun Prairie on Oct. 26 to celebrate Wisconsin’s Indigenous tribes. Most of the guests at the screening were of tribal descent, enrolled tribal clientele of the firm and elected tribal leaders. Also in attendance were special guests Memphis Belle Cleveland and Tommo Grass, who acted as extras in the film. Grass said it was important to have Indigenous people “from anywhere and everywhere” in the film. “I think it meant the world to a lot of us,” Grass said. As someone from Oklahoma with family members who are a part of the Osage tribe, Grass said being in the film meant a lot to him because he knew how important it was to tell this story. Grass said there are a lot of people who still share the same last names of some of the victims depicted in the film and many Osage people of his generation knew of people directly impacted by the “real-life horrible things” that happened during the Osage Reign of Terror — which refers to the nearly two-decade-long string of brutal murders depicted in the film. “I think it carried a lot of weight for a lot of us,” Grass said. There was “a heaviness” at times while filming due to many of the background actors having lineage that traced back to Osage family members who witnessed the atrocities depicted in the film firsthand, Cleveland said. “Not only were we over there portraying these people, but we're also almost having to relive what they had to go through as well,” Cleveland said. Cleveland said it meant a lot to be able to tell this story on the big screen alongside big-name actors, people she said were genuine and “respected our Native American values” on and off set. Although there were a lot of hurdles she had to overcome, Cleveland said she was glad she took the jump to be a part of this film. “I knew what this movie was going to mean for Indigenous people,” Cleveland said. “It's not every day that you get a story being told about the atrocities that have happened in many tribes, not just Osage.” Though many of the guests at the screening were from Wisconsin, some traveled quite far to attend. Charmaine McDarment, a general counselor for the Tule River Indian Tribe of California, caught a red-eye flight from California to attend the premiere. McDarment said she was unfamiliar with the Osage tribe and the atrocities they endured before reading the book a year ago. “I mean, every tribe has their stories of what happened to them. It didn't surprise me, but it was so tragic and hard for me to read,” McDarment said. “Killers of the Flower Moon” is eye-opening for people who don’t know a lot about Native American tribes and the hardships they have faced throughout American history, McDarment added. “It's hard to find Native American historical stories if you're not informed because they are not common knowledge,” McDarment said. “The film makes you think about what [Native Americans] have been through and what we had to do to survive.” “Killers of the Flower Moon” was released in theaters on Oct. 20 and is also available to stream on Apple TV. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. Anna KleiberAnna Kleiber is the state news editor for The Daily Cardinal. She previously served as the arts editor. Anna has written in-depth on elections, legislative maps and campus news. She has interned with WisPolitics and Madison Magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @annakleiber03. More Student financial committee recommends $27 tuition increase to balance UHS budget Protesters detained at Board of Regents meeting will receive citations, UWPD says ‘We’re the dark horses': Wisconsin Indian Americans divided on election as political representation grows
Jordan Ellenberg Courtesy of Davey Hubay SCIENCE Science Sit-Down: Jordan Ellenberg talks AI research, student engagement University of Wisconsin-Madison math professor Jordan Ellenberg sits down with The Daily Cardinal to discuss his latest AI research and writing and student work. By Sonia Bendre September 12, 2024 | 3:00am CDT University of Wisconsin-Madison math professor Jordan Ellenberg eats pizza weekly with other Discovery Fellows and department professors, stimulating discussion about new topics in science. Most recently, Ellenberg has taken an interest in artificial intelligence and spent time working on a project with Google Deepmind to brainstorm different uses for the tool in the mathematical discipline. “They had a very wonderful idea of using a large language model to generate chunks of code that are supposed to sort of help you with a certain mathematical problem,” Ellenberg told The Daily Cardinal. “It's pretty fun to read codes in a machine mode and try to learn stuff.” After graduating with a Ph.D. in math from Harvard University in 1998, Ellenberg took a position as a postdoctoral student at the Simon Laufer Mathematical Sciences Institute. He taught at Princeton University for eight years before becoming an Assistant Professor at UW-Madison, where he remains a professor today. Ellenberg’s research background in number theory, geometry Ellenberg primarily studies number theory and algebraic geometry, both areas within the greater field of pure mathematics. He now holds the positions of John D. MacArthur Professor and Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professor at the UW-Madison, as well as of a Cornell A.D. White Professor at Large. The John D. MacArthur professorship recognizes distinguished scholars in research, the Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professorship recognizes exceptional scholarship as well as teaching and service and the Cornell A.D. White Professorship is considered one of the most prestigious distinctions in an academic’s career. “A lot of my research is in very traditional, very classical areas of number theory… It's sort of saying, here's an equation. Does it have solutions? Can you find whole numbers that solve it?” Ellenberg said. “That's a very, very old kind of question. We still basically don't know anything about it. I mean, we had a few thousand years to work on it, and we're making some progress.” For Ellenberg, teaching is a way to tell stories about math. “Every single thing we use was invented by some person, for some reason, for some problem they were trying to do. I find it really useful to bring that into the classroom,” Ellenberg said. Ellenberg has also published three books, including a novel called “The Grasshopper King.” His books “How Not to Be Wrong” and “Shape” combine statistical data and mathematics with storytelling techniques. Ellenberg also writes a blog, called Quomodocumque. “I have a long-term goal of trying to figure out how to teach and how to talk about this process of writing about science, writing about math. A lot of people do it, and there's clearly a demand, but hardly anyone's trained in it. There's no process to writing about data,” Ellenberg said. Enjoy what you're reading? Get content from The Daily Cardinal delivered to your inbox Email Among other classes, Ellenberg teaches a first-year interest group called “Writing and Data,” which focuses on teaching students to synthesize data into news and scientific writing. By the end of the first-year interest group, students are expected to create a magazine-style piece. His goal: talk to and support non-scientists. “There’s a way that you learn in high school to write an academic paper, and, in your classes here, when you write, there's a certain academic style…but that's not really the way we explain stuff to the general public. And for scientists who are working, there's a way to write a journal article, but it's also its own separate style,” he said. ‘The students here are really eager to learn’ Ellenberg shared his thoughts on one of the more controversial areas of math curriculum education: the Common Core, a set of standards for English and mathematics education for kindergarten through high school students. Ellenberg, an advocate of the curriculum, has written extensively on the Common Core and K-12 education in periodicals like The New York Times and The Washington Post. “I basically think it's like a very solid set of goals. It's pretty ambitious, and it sets pretty high standards,” Ellenberg said. “One thing that it really centers, and I think is very right, is that the ability to do arithmetic manipulations and then form algebraic manipulations is absolutely critical, and kids have to not just sort of know how to do those things, but really master those things.” Ellenberg also shared his opinion on online mathematics education — a format that had many downsides, but some surprising innovations, he said. While the general format led to a lack of student attention, he said, the chat sidebar allowed for more student participation throughout lectures, letting students offer input without interrupting the teacher or the flow of the classroom. Ellenberg looks forward to beginning the new semester, where he will be teaching “Writing and Data,” a seminar in number theory, and a section of a course called “Reading and Research.” “This is a really fun place to teach. The students here are really eager to learn, and it's just always a fun classroom,” Ellenberg said. Support your local paper Donate Today The Daily Cardinal has been covering the University and Madison community since 1892. Please consider giving today. More At least 3 people dead, including the shooter, after juvenile opened fire at Abundant Life Christian School This Wisconsin health care worker has concerns about Trump’s election. Here’s why District 18 Ald. Charles Myadze arrested on tentative domestic abuse charges
UW–Madison seniors Klingele, Boes were finalists this year for the Rhodes Scholarship November 18, 2024 By Doug Erickson University of Wisconsin–Madison seniors Felicity Klingele and Sophie Boes were finalists this year for the Rhodes Scholarship, one of the most prestigious and selective undergraduate academic honors in the world. The Rhodes Trust announced the 32 winners on Nov. 16. An additional 206 American students were finalists for the coveted awards, including Klingele and Boes. Klingele, of Madison, Wisconsin, is double majoring in psychology and philosophy and completing a senior honors thesis in philosophy. She will complete her bachelor’s degree this December. Boes, of Rochester, Minnesota, is double majoring in political science and English language and linguistics, with honors in the liberal arts and in the English major. She will graduate in May 2025. “Felicity and Sophie should be very proud of all they’ve accomplished — it is an immense honor to make it to the finalist stage for the Rhodes Scholarship,” says Julie Stubbs, director of UW–Madison’s Undergraduate Academic Awards Office. “Beyond academic excellence, both are concerned for the welfare of others and committed to using their talents to improve communities. That ambition to serve the common good is at the heart of the Wisconsin Idea and the Rhodes Scholarship.” Felicity Klingele Klingele began college at age 15 and completed courses at Madison College before transferring to UW–Madison. She is a recipient of UW–Madison’s Charles Manthey Winter Philosophy Scholarship and co-founded the UW–Madison Philosophical Society, where students meet weekly throughout the semester to discuss philosophical works and ethical questions. Under Klingele’s leadership, meetings have become a place where students can express and explore a diversity of viewpoints through civil discourse. Klingele is a fellow for UW’s Catholic Social and Political Thought Initiative, and she founded both a women’s mental health support group and a women’s philosophy and theology group at Saint Paul’s Catholic Student Center. Klingele also serves on the Diocese of Madison’s life and ethics board. Additionally, she is a member of the UWPD Police Advisory Council, sharing community feedback on the department’s practices and policies with UWPD staff. Sophie Boes Boes has received eight institutional merit awards, including the competitive Hilldale Undergraduate Research Fellowship, which funds an independent research project completed under the mentorship of UW–Madison faculty. Boes has contributed to multiple projects as a research assistant in Professor Jacee Cho’s Second Language Acquisition Lab, earning authorship on a presentation at the 2023 International Conference of Experimental Linguistics in Athens, Greece, and a paper published in the conference proceedings. Boes volunteers as a childcare specialist at a community center that supports families affected by child sexual abuse. She also has served as a writing tutor for elementary school students and undergraduates, applying her English linguistics expertise to meaningful community service. As a sophomore, Boes was selected as a UW–Madison writing fellow. This fall, she assumed the role of writing fellow assistant director. Also this fall, Boes is an undergraduate teaching fellow for Counseling Psychology 125, a one-credit course for first-year students. Rhodes Scholarships provide all expenses for several years of study at the University of Oxford in England. Candidates are judged on a proven record of intellectual and academic achievement, integrity of character, interest in and respect for others, leadership ability, and the energy to fully utilize their talents. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: student awards
‘Top Chef’ standout will whip up a speech for UW’s winter commencement October 29, 2024 By Doug Erickson For news media More information Dan Jacobs is the head chef and co-owner of acclaimed Milwaukee restaurants EsterEv, a globally inspired tasting menu concept, and Dandan, a modern Chinese American concept with Midwest sensibility. Milwaukee’s Dan Jacobs won the hearts of viewers last spring on Bravo’s “Top Chef” Wisconsin season. Now he’ll share his recipe for success with University of Wisconsin–Madison graduates as the keynote speaker for winter commencement Dec. 15. Jacobs was one of three finalists on the 21st season of the popular cooking competition series. He finished as a runner-up, making it all the way to the end without ever hearing those fateful words, “Please pack your knives and go.” Jacobs is the head chef and co-owner of acclaimed Milwaukee restaurants EsterEv, a globally inspired tasting menu concept, and Dandan, a modern Chinese American concept with Midwest sensibility. Jacobs and his business partner, Dan Van Rite, are five-time James Beard Best Chef Midwest semi-finalists, and 2024 James Beard Best Chef Midwest nominees. As a contestant on “Top Chef,” Jacobs spoke openly about his challenges with Kennedy’s Disease, a genetic neuromuscular ailment commonly mistaken for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). He was diagnosed in 2016. The disease often makes simple tasks like walking upstairs or chopping an onion feel like a massive undertaking. Jacobs said he applied to be on the show in part to encourage people with disabilities to pursue their passions. “During his time on ‘Top Chef,’ Dan Jacobs impressed us with his culinary skills and inspired us with his humanity,” Chancellor Jennifer L. Mnookin says. “Dan is someone at the top of his profession — a successful entrepreneur and business owner in an incredibly challenging and competitive industry. He’ll have a lot to share with our graduates about pursuing your dreams and doing so with resilience and heart.” Jacobs has had an impact far beyond the kitchen. He has raised more than $90,000 for Kennedy’s Disease awareness and is an active member of the Independent Restaurant Coalition. He was one of four Americans to speak to President-elect Joe Biden on behalf of independent restauranteurs, and he is deeply involved in many charitable efforts, including the Main Street Alliance, World Central Kitchen, No Kid Hungry, and the James Beard Foundation’s Climate Solutions for Restaurant Survival Campaign. UW–Madison commencement speakers are chosen by the senior class officers in consultation with the Chancellor’s Office. “Chef Dan is a role model for so many of us,” says Sam Mahlum, senior class president. “Through determination and perseverance, he turned his passion into a successful career. But beyond that, he epitomizes the aspirations of so many Badgers — to do good in this world and to live lives of integrity and compassion.” Jacobs is a Chicago native who began building strong ties to Wisconsin early in his career. A summer job as a short-order line cook for a breakfast restaurant in Fish Creek, Wisconsin, led to a position at the Inn at Cedar Crossing in Sturgeon Bay, Wisconsin. Jacobs has said the position cemented his love for food and convinced him to pursue his career as a professional chef. He took a few courses at the Cooking and Hospitality Institute of Chicago, then began cooking at many top-tier Chicago restaurants. He and his wife Kate moved to Milwaukee in 2011. Jacobs says his experience on “Top Chef” will inform the speech he gives to Badgers at the Kohl Center. “It was a crash course in tenacity, grit, and perseverance — all skills that are essential in life,” he says, “And that’s where the real growth happens. Competing on the show was proof to myself that my disability doesn’t have to limit or define my potential. I hope my journey inspires others, particularly those facing challenges, to pursue their passions and overcome adversity to reach their fullest potential.” He aspires to give a speech that’s authentic, honest, and inspiring. “I want to share the challenges I’ve faced, but also celebrate the journey itself. Success, for me, will be seeing some heads nodding, some smiles, and maybe a few moments of reflection where they realize that they, too, can overcome whatever life throws at them.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: commencement You may also like… 2022 UW–Madison winter commencement takes place on Sunday Winter commencement 2022: pomp, poignancy and — geez Louise! — Charlie Berens Unfinished business: Group of PhD students will walk in commencement 50 years after earning degrees
New mentorship program offers support, community for Indigenous graduate students December 4, 2024 By Renata Solan A new group will provide support and mentorship for Indigenous graduate students across the UW–Madison campus. Photo: Jeff Miller With new funding from the National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education grant, Indigenous scientists and educators at UW–Madison are formalizing support and mentorship for Indigenous graduate students on campus. The grant provides approximately $1 million over four years to support the Center for Indigenous Research to Create Learning and Excellence (CIRCLE), which will be overseen by Judith Simcox (Crow; assistant professor, Department of Biochemistry), Danielle Yancey (Menominee/Santee; director, Native American Center for Health Professions), Jeneile Luebke (Mashkiiziibii; assistant professor, School of Nursing) and Lauren W. Yowelunh McLester-Davis (Oneida; scientist and director of Indigenous Science Advocacy). “This [program] really arose from regular meetings with the Native American Center for Health Professions and discussing how we could build something better for the next generations of students,” Simcox says. “Indigenous people believe in honoring the generations that came before them and serving the generations that come after them in actions and decisions. When Indigenous UW–Madison faculty members met to support the Indigenous graduate students, they realized they needed to guide them in navigating academia.” Native Americans account for 2.9% of the United States’ population and are drastically underrepresented in scientific research, constituting just less than 0.4% of masters and doctoral students according to the NSF. Of the Indigenous students enrolled in graduate school, only a quarter complete their degree. Data for Indigenous students at UW–Madison mirrors national numbers. “The rate at which Indigenous graduate students are graduating from our university is not on par with graduate students of different races and ethnicities,” says McLester-Davis. While the reasons for student attrition vary, a consistent obstacle for Indigenous graduate students is a lack of systematized and targeted support. Historically, the burden of providing support has fallen to graduate students, who must seek out additional mentorship from Indigenous faculty, and on faculty, who provide academic and emotional support to Indigenous graduate students beyond their own programs and laboratories. “You can have an advisor or committee member who is completely supportive and a great ally,” says Elena Hill, a member of the Oneida Nation and a graduate student in the agroecology Program. “There’s a certain way of being seen and understood — like you are back home — that is hard to find outside of your community. I feel an obligation for my career to help and aid my community. That motivates every single decision I make as a researcher. With mentorship and support from Indigenous faculty, staff and other graduate students, it takes a burden off me having to figure out for myself how to explain that to the scientific community.” CIRCLE aims to support Indigenous students throughout their time in graduate school, and in turn, improve graduation rates and increase the number of Indigenous scientists contributing to STEM knowledge. The program will connect students with Indigenous faculty members; provide training for academic advisors; hold weekly lunch meetings and other opportunities for students to share about their research and experiences; and provide support for interdisciplinary approaches to community-centered Indigenous science. CIRCLE will also distribute microgrants to support community involvement and participation in Indigenous students’ research. McLester-Davis emphasizes that CIRCLE will meet the unique needs of UW–Madison’s Indigenous graduate students. “Indigenous students get asked a lot of them. Being at school means being separated from community and family and their spiritual and traditional teachings, and students don’t always have time to practice their traditional ways of being. That physical separation, along with the challenges that come when academic mentors don’t understand or aren’t familiar with your culture, can impact their ability to be healthy and accomplish their academic goals in this environment.” CIRCLE will learn from and build on the support and mentorship that NACHP in the School of Medicine and Public Health provides for Indigenous health professional students. NACHP’s mission is to improve health outcomes and address the healthcare workforce needs in communities. CIRCLE echoes this same mission while also broadening the scope to include graduate students in science, social science and related fields where Indigenous scholars are also needed. Jennifer Jones, a Diné/Navajo graduate student in the Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, hopes that CIRCLE will be a step towards a future with more Indigenous researchers who can work closely with communities, scientists and lawmakers to address issues of environmental justice and work towards a more sustainable future. “Researchers like me can bridge the gap between academic literature and tribal government leaders. We can bridge the gap between people who are educated in the way we are here at UW–Madison and people who are educated in traditional knowledge,” says Jones. “Our future depends on how we communicate with communities, how we address people who are impacted by issues of environmental justice, and how we think about sustainable energy systems.” CIRCLE is open to all Indigenous graduate students, including those in professional degree programs, at UW–Madison. Students who wish to get involved in CIRCLE and advisors who wish to learn more should contact Lauren W. Yowelunh McLester-Davis. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: graduate students, indigenous
Resources for UW-Madison students and employees December 16, 2024 2:15 pm Monday, Dec. 16 The City of Madison issued a statement about the Abundant Life School shooting that took place earlier today, including additional resources for anyone affected. 1 pm Monday, Dec. 16 The University of Wisconsin–Madison is offering resources and support to UW students and employees who may have been affected by a school shooting that took place at Abundant Life Christian School on Madison’s Far East Side on Dec. 16, as well as condolences to all those in the Madison community affected by the tragic incident. The situation is developing and the public safety response is being coordinated by the Madison Police Department and there is no ongoing threat to the community. The situation did not take place in downtown Madison. Students Counseling and crisis support as a result of this incident or any other situation may be obtained by calling University Health Services at (608) 265-5600. If you need immediate assistance, call the UHS Crisis Line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. For more information, visit uhs.wisc.edu. Students may also contact the Office of Student Assistance and Support (formerly, the Dean of Students Office.) Employees Staff and faculty who would like to talk to someone in response to this or any other situation may contact the Employee Assistance Office at (608) 263-2987 for an appointment. For immediate, 24/7 counseling support, employees are encouraged to contact LifeMatters at 800-634-6433. More information about both services is available online at eao.wisc.edu. UW–Madison community This incident did not occur at UW–Madison and is not connected to campus, but UWPD encourages all students and employees to contact them immediately by calling 911 if they experience safety concerns on campus. For non-emergencies, UWPD can be reached at (608) 264-COPS or through the BadgerSAFE app. Additional resources for safety and security are available. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email
Q&A with commencement speaker Dan Jacobs: ‘I feel like if Madison was a dish, it would be macaroni and cheese.’ December 9, 2024 By Serena Wang Dan Jacobs works in the kitchen at Dandan, a Milwaukee restaurant he co-owns. Photo by Angela Major/WPR Chef Dan Jacobs, co-owner of Milwaukee hotspots Dandan and EsterEv, won over a lot of hearts on Bravo’s “Top Chef” 21st season, where he finished as runner-up. He’ll share his personal warmth and cooking wisdom when he delivers the keynote address at the University of Wisconsin–Madison’s Winter 2024 Commencement on Sunday, Dec. 15, at the Kohl Center. In an interview with UW journalism student Serena Wang, Jacobs discussed life in the kitchen, his advice for college students, and why Madison reminds him of baked mac and cheese. Answers have been edited for length. What inspired you to get into cooking as a career and what do you think is the most fun part of being in the culinary industry? You know, as a kid growing up, I think my parents both saw me in banking or law or, you know, something more traditional. I remember my first restaurant job was at a cookery in Fish Creek, Wisconsin, and I was a short-line cook. The nighttime cooks did stir fries and had woks, and they did steaks and stuff, and they were really cool. They made money and I remember the first time I burned myself was at the cookery. I remember saying to the nighttime line cook, “Man, I think I have to go to the hospital, this is bad.” And he was like, “Oh, man, it’s not bad.” He passed me a beer because they would drink beer while they were doing service and he’s like, “wrap this around your burn, your hand will be fine.” I was like, “I love this industry.” What do you think is the most fun part of being in the culinary industry? I personally think everybody should work in restaurants at some point in life, whether it be a dishwasher or host. I think it teaches you so much about organization, interpersonal relationships, how to treat a guest, how to treat humans, period. I think the best part about this industry is it never gets dull. Every day is a new adventure, and you never stop learning. I was lucky enough to find something that I loved to do at an early age, and I can’t tell you how much that has brought joy to my life as opposed to doing something that I had to do. After your diagnosis with Kennedy’s Disease, what adjustments have you had to make for you to continue to cook? I think the biggest change has been moving into more of a mentorship position. Things take a little bit longer. There are certain tasks that I just can’t do. EsterEv lends its own particular challenges as the prep kitchen and the walk-in cooler and storage are all in the basement and so walking up and down stairs is not really something I can do, even without carrying anything but with carrying anything it becomes increasingly difficult. So, it’s an understanding of the team around us willing to pitch in and kind of do things for me. Like, “Hey, can you guys go downstairs,” or I’ll go downstairs, and I’ll pack up a boatload of things I am going to be working with and then I have somebody sherpa it upstairs for me because I can’t. I think everybody really understands that part of it, like my brain is sharp as a pencil but, sometimes my body just doesn’t want to do things that it’s supposed to do. I legitimately just do the best I can whenever I can. What was your go-to meal in college? Oh man, it’s really funny. We were living in a four-bedroom apartment in Rogers Park, which is the northmost neighborhood in Chicago. Not the nicest neighborhood. It was like 1,000 bucks a month, and we were all broke, and we did peanut butter and tortillas because tortillas were really cheap, and peanut butter was really cheap. Because there was protein. But it was like, at least that’s what was keeping me alive. What’s your easy, affordable meal that college students can make at home? Make a soup or something that has got a bunch of different textures and flavors, or even like a really interesting salad. Like you can do ground chicken, ground beef whatever it is, it’s relatively inexpensive and then you’re kind of like seasoning it up with a bunch of condiments and then you just need like lettuce leaves and some herbs and it’s relatively healthy and high in protein, and it’s an easy go-to that you can make a batch of it. Burger tacos, same thing. You can make a batch of this stuff and now you’re eating for a couple of days. If you were to recommend a few essential ingredients for college students to keep on hand, what would they be? I think investing in a nice peppermill is not a bad idea. I feel that ground pepper is great if you use it right away but then give it like a week and it’s just like it’s nothing. So invest in it, invest in a pepper mill, you know that is kind of like an easy one. There are three things that my mom always put in everything, and I feel that’s always kind of what we still have in our house at all points — Worcestershire sauce, Lawry’s Seasoned Salt and soy sauce. If you were to make a dish that represents the University of Wisconsin–Madison, what would it be? All right, let’s do something with cheese. I feel like there’s something there. I always feel like Madison is so comfortable and like home. I don’t live there; I’ve never lived there, but it’s always felt very home like it’s always felt very welcoming. I feel like if Madison was a dish, it would be macaroni and cheese. Like baked macaroni and cheese made from scratch, with really good cheese, really saucy and some nice breadcrumbs on top, baked in the oven. Just comforting, warm and welcoming. What do you want graduates to take away from your speech? I think graduating from college gives you such a leg up on so many other people. It gives you so much of an opportunity and a foot in the door. There are so many people who don’t have the opportunity that these graduating students do. The number one thing that I hope they take away is to use their power for good. Be empathetic. Help people out that can’t help themselves. Be those forces of change that make Wisconsin better, that don’t create division, that create togetherness and empathy. I think that’s something that I really hope they walk away with. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: commencement You may also like… 2022 UW–Madison winter commencement takes place on Sunday Winter commencement 2022: pomp, poignancy and — geez Louise! — Charlie Berens Unfinished business: Group of PhD students will walk in commencement 50 years after earning degrees
Meet Sawyer Getschman, student speaker for Winter 2024 Commencement December 2, 2024 By Doug Erickson Sawyer Getschman is shown in a park in Seoul, South Korea, during her year abroad there. Submitted photo Sawyer Getschman had never heard of the University of Wisconsin–Madison when she started turning her attention to prospective colleges. She was attending high school in Germany at the time due to her father’s career as a U.S. Navy commander. “Basically, I did a lot of research about how students felt about the university they were attending,” says Getschman, who will be the student speaker this December for winter commencement. “UW–Madison had such a great reputation, and it also had one of the best East Asian language departments in the United States.” Getschman, who is earning a bachelor’s degree in East Asian languages and cultures, has no regrets about choosing UW–Madison. That’s part of the reason she applied to be the student commencement speaker. “I loved every minute of being at Madison,” she says. “I didn’t want to pass up the opportunity to share that in public.” The student speaker is chosen through a competitive process conducted by the senior class officers, in consultation with the Office of the Chancellor. All winter graduates were eligible to apply. UW–Madison’s Winter 2024 Commencement will take place at 10 a.m. on Sunday, Dec. 15 at the Kohl Center, 601 W. Dayton St. Getschman was born in Corpus Christi, Texas, but quickly became a citizen of the world. Her father’s job took the family to locales across the globe. During her youth, Getschman attended seven schools in four countries on three continents — including six years in Japan. (She is proud of having hiked to the top of Mount Fuji in Honshu, Japan, faster than her three older siblings.) She graduated as salutatorian from a high school on a military base in the United Kingdom. “It was challenging in some ways,” Getschman says of being a military kid, “but it was the only life I ever knew. Looking back, I’m very grateful for getting to see so much of the world at a young age.” Getschman studied Japanese in high school and also fell in love with Korean culture. Those interests drew her to UW–Madison’s East Asian languages program. In addition to her major, she is earning a certificate in teaching English to speakers of other languages. At UW–Madison, Getschman has been a member of the Korean learning community and a Korean peer language tutor. Her junior year, she served as vice president of Korean Happy Hour, a club that provides opportunities for students to speak Korean outside of class. Her senior year, she studied abroad in South Korea. “One of the great things about going to a big university like UW–Madison is that there are so many amazing opportunities,” says Getschman, who intends to pursue her dream job of teaching English in South Korea. “I’m excited to share my experiences and represent my fellow classmates at winter commencement.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: commencement You may also like… 2022 UW–Madison winter commencement takes place on Sunday Winter commencement 2022: pomp, poignancy and — geez Louise! — Charlie Berens Unfinished business: Group of PhD students will walk in commencement 50 years after earning degrees
Human stem cell-derived heart cells are safe in monkeys, could treat congenital heart disease November 13, 2024 By Jordana Lenon For news media More information Heart muscle cells grown from human induced pluripotent stem cells (in green) have successfully integrated into rhesus macaque heart muscle in this microscope image of heart tissue from a new study by UW–Madison and Mayo Clinic researchers. Photo courtesy Emborg Lab / UW–Madison Heart muscle cells grown from stem cells show promise in monkeys with a heart problem that typically results from a heart defect sometimes present at birth in humans, according to new research from the University of Wisconsin–Madison and Mayo Clinic. Heart disease, the No. 1 killer of Americans, can affect people at any time across their lifespans — even from birth, when heart conditions are known as congenital heart defects. Regenerating tissue to support healthy heart function could keep many of those hearts beating stronger and longer, and this is where stem cell research is stepping in. A research team led by Marina Emborg, professor of medical physics in the UW–Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, and Timothy Nelson, physician scientist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, reported recently in the journal Cell Transplantation that heart muscle cells grown from induced pluripotent stem cells can integrate into the hearts of monkeys with a state of pressure overload. Also referred to as right ventricular dysfunction, pressure overload often affects children with congenital heart defects. Patients experience chest discomfort, breathlessness, palpitations and body swelling, and can develop a weakened heart. The condition can be fatal if left untreated. Nearly all single ventricle congenital heart defects, particularly those in the right ventricle, eventually lead to heart failure. Surgery to correct the defect is a temporary solution, according to the researchers. Eventually, patients may require a heart transplant. However, the availability of donor hearts — complicated by the young age at which most patients require a transplant — is extremely limited. In their new study, the researchers focused on grafts of stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes as a possible complementary treatment to traditional surgical repair of cardiac defects. Their goal was to directly support ventricular function and overall healing. “There is a great need for alternative treatments of this condition,” says Jodi Scholz, the study’s lead author and chair of Comparative Medicine at Mayo Clinic. “Stem cell treatments could someday delay or even prevent the need for heart transplants.” The researchers transplanted clinical-grade human induced pluripotent stem cells — cells collected from human donors, coaxed back into a stem cell state and then developed into cell types compatible with heart muscle — into rhesus macaque monkeys with surgically induced right ventricular pressure overload. The cells successfully integrated into the organization of the surrounding host myocardium, the muscular layer of the heart. The animals’ hearts and overall health were closely monitored throughout the process. The authors noted that episodes of ventricular tachycardia (an increased heart rate) occurred in five out of 16 animals receiving transplanted cells, with two monkeys presenting incessant tachycardia. These episodes resolved within 19 days. “We delivered the cells to support existing cardiac tissue,” Emborg says. “Our goal with this particular study, as a precursor to human studies, was to make sure that the transplanted cells were safe and would successfully integrate with the organization of the surrounding tissue. We leveraged my team’s experience with stem cells and cardiac evaluation in Parkinson’s disease to assess this innovative therapeutic approach.” The research proved the feasibility and safety of using stem cells in the first nonhuman primate model of right ventricular pressure overload. Macaques, in particular, have been critical to advancing stem cell therapies for heart disease, kidney disease, Parkinson’s disease, eye diseases and more. “The demonstration of successful integration and maturation of the cells into a compromised heart is a promising step towards the clinical application for congenital heart defects,” Emborg says. The research was supported by the Todd and Karen Wanek Family Program for Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome and National Institutes of Health Grant P51OD011106 to the Wisconsin National Primate Research Center. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: animal research You may also like… UW researchers identify cell type that could be key to preventing marrow transplant complication Relieving stress in insulin-producing cells protects against Type 1 diabetes Mice eating less of specific amino acid — overrepresented in diet of obese people — live longer, healthier
H5N1 virus isolated from infected dairy worker is 100% lethal in ferrets, but does not appear to be circulating in nature anymore October 28, 2024 By Will Cushman For news media More information A dairy worker in Texas became infected with H5N1 avian influenza likely during the course of milking cows. A sample of the virus taken from the worker was 100% lethal in ferrets, though it spread inefficiently and does not appear to be continuing to spread. Photo: Althea Dotzour A strain of H5N1 avian influenza virus found in a Texas dairy worker who was infected this spring was able to spread among ferrets through the air, although inefficiently, and killed 100% of infected animals in studies University of Wisconsin–Madison researchers performed with the strain earlier this year. The good news: the dairy worker experienced mild symptoms and fully recovered, and the H5N1 strain that infected the worker does not appear to have continued spreading in the wild. Still, the findings highlight the risks posed by a virus that continues to spread among dairy cattle and occasionally to farm workers, and the study’s lead scientist says he was surprised by the ease with which this particular strain was able to kill ferrets. “This is one of the most pathogenic viruses I’ve ever seen in ferrets,” says Yoshihiro Kawaoka, a UW–Madison professor of pathobiological sciences who spearheaded the work, described Oct. 28, 2024, in the journal Nature. Ferrets are a common model for studying how influenza viruses that primarily affect birds are able to adapt to mammals, a topic that Kawaoka and his colleagues at UW–Madison’s Influenza Research Institute investigate since such a jump could trigger an influenza pandemic. Like other influenza viruses, H5N1 viruses mutate at a relatively rapid clip as they infect new hosts. Sometimes these mutations allow the viruses to more easily infect and spread among new species. That’s how the current viruses, which have been infecting birds around the world in recent years, began to spread among mammals, most notably North American dairy cattle in 2024. Kawaoka and his collaborators found that the H5N1 virus that infected the Texas dairy worker included a mutation that the team first identified in 2001 as important for causing severe disease. Luckily, Kawaoka says, the strain with that mutation seems to have died out. “This isolate is unique among the H5N1 viruses circulating in cows,” he says. Kawaoka hypothesizes that H5N1 viruses took two paths when they made the jump from birds to cows, both facilitated by mutations that made the virus better adapted to mammals. Kawaoka and his colleagues suggest that one path resulted in the more concerning mutation found in the Texas dairy worker, while the other led to a less dangerous mutation in the same protein. “Both mutations give the virus the ability to adapt to mammals, but the good thing is the one containing this more pathogenic mutation has not been detected again,” Kawaoka says. “So there are no extremely pathogenic H5N1 viruses currently circulating in cows. However, if a currently circulating cow H5N1 virus acquires that mutation, then that would be an issue.” Whether a virus with such a mutation would be dangerous for humans remains to be seen. “The puzzling thing is why the human who got this virus did not have a severe infection,” says Kawaoka, noting a few possibilities. Perhaps exposure to seasonal influenza viruses provides some level of protection via antibodies, or maybe the route of infection is important; the Texas dairy worker’s main symptom was conjunctivitis, suggesting the virus entered through the eye rather than the more typical respiratory route. Alternatively, more robust surveillance of influenza cases among American dairy workers since the virus began spreading on farms might mean more cases — including mild ones — are being identified. Another possibility is this particular strain might simply be less severe in humans than mammals like ferrets. “Those are all possibilities, but we don’t know,” says Kawaoka. “So, we’re now trying to understand why this virus is so pathogenic in ferrets and what that could mean for human infections.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: biology, research You may also like… New recipes for origin of life may point way to distant, inhabited planets First-in-kind psychedelic trials treat opioid and methamphetamine use disorders UW researchers identify cell type that could be key to preventing marrow transplant complication
Gene therapy protects against motor neuron disease in rats November 12, 2024 By Will Cushman For news media More information This image shows a section of brain tissue from a rat that received a gene therapy targeting the Trk-fused gene. A mutation in that gene is implicated in the development of certain motor neuron diseases. Green arrows highlight neurons expressing elevated levels of the gene following the therapy. Red arrows indicate other nerve cells called astrocytes that lack increased expression. Image courtesy of Anjon Audhya/UW–Madison University of Wisconsin–Madison researchers targeting a group of hereditary neurodegenerative diseases have found success using a gene therapy treatment in an animal model. The approach, which uses CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing technology, offers a unique and promising strategy that could one day treat rare but debilitating motor neuron diseases in humans. Hereditary spastic paraplegia, or HSP, is a group of movement disorders that cause progressive weakness and stiffness in the legs of people with certain inherited genetic mutations. The rare disorders usually lead to physical limitations and use of a wheelchair. Studying disease processes in animal models is an indispensable part of developing and testing any new treatments before they’re offered to humans. But scientists had historically struggled to replicate HSP’s symptoms and disease progression in animal models. Anjon Audhya That changed in 2022, when a group of UW–Madison scientists led by Anjon Audhya, a professor of biomolecular chemistry, used CRISPR-Cas9 technology to develop a rat model that carries a genetic mutation associated with HSP. The mutation is in the Trk-fused gene, which typically facilitates the transportation of proteins within nerve cells called neurons. When that function is disrupted in people — and rats — it leads to worsening symptoms of weakness and stiffness. Since 2022, Audhya and his colleagues have refined their rat model and begun testing therapeutic approaches for HSP. They recently developed a strategy that protects rats that carry a genetic mutation causing HSP from developing symptoms. That approach relies on a genetically engineered virus that targets neurons and introduces a normal version of the Trk-fused gene (which doesn’t include disease-causing mutations) to compensate for the mutated one. The scientists injected this engineered virus into the brains of day-old rats. “Those animals never got disease,” says Audhya. “So they were able to live for many, many additional weeks, never showing signs of disease. It’s a real demonstration that the gene therapy approach is highly effective in addressing disease symptomology.” Specifically, the gene therapy approach allowed the non-mutated gene to be expressed in neurons and better support the transportation of proteins, preventing disease. The group recently reported their findings in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Additionally, the researchers made a fundamental discovery about HSP — it’s primarily a disorder of neurons, rather than other cells found in the brain. When the team tested a similar strategy on cells called astrocytes, those animals still developed disease. Audhya and his colleagues are already moving on to follow-up studies developing another animal model and targeting a different gene mutation, which is more prevalent in HSP patients. They’re also planning to inject therapeutics via the spinal cord, which is closer to how treatment in humans would occur. Because HSP is a rare disease, funding for these studies can be difficult to secure. Audhya notes the support his team has received from Blu Genes Foundation, The Lilly and Blair Foundation and CureSPG4 Foundation has been a crucial part of their progress toward a potential cure for HSP. “We ultimately hope our preclinical gene therapy efforts will lead to a new clinical trial in patients in the years to come,” he says. Additional funding to support this project came from the National Institutes of Health (R01NS124165 and R35GM134865). Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: chemistry, genetics, research You may also like… Relieving stress in insulin-producing cells protects against Type 1 diabetes Remnant of cell division could be responsible for spreading cancer Zapping manure with special electrode promises an efficient method to produce fertilizers, other chemicals
Aquatic invasive species are more widespread in Wisconsin than previously thought September 5, 2024 By Adam Hinterthuer and Madelyn Anderson For news media More information Watermilfoil and and algae float near the water’s surface where Dorn Creek Marsh flows into the northern edge of Lake Mendota during summer on July 29, 2015. The aquatic plants and the lake’s ecosystem health are frequently studied as part of ongoing research conducted by the Center for Limnology at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Photo: Jeff Miller A report on more than 40 years of research on Wisconsin lakes is highlighting some of the lessons scientists have learned about aquatic invasive species, including that far more ecosystems are playing host to non-native species than previously thought. However, the researchers note, those species aren’t necessarily detrimental to their new habitat and, in some cases, the negative “impacts of invasive species control may be greater than the impacts of the invasive species” themselves. Jake Vander Zanden Photo: Bryce Richter That doesn’t mean scientists aren’t concerned about different species moving into new ecosystems, says Jake Vander Zanden, director of the University of Wisconsin–Madison’s Center for Limnology and lead author on the report. “There are many examples where an invasive species has remarkable ecosystem impacts. They can result in fisheries decline, water quality decrease and more, which negatively impacts humans and the environment,” Vander Zanden says. But ecological destruction is far from a foregone conclusion in invasive species stories. The researchers, who recently published their analysis in the journal BioScience, highlight several lessons learned through four decades of data collection, research and experiments conducted by the North Temperate Lakes Long-Term Ecological Research program. Housed at the Center for Limnology, the program is one of 27 such sites funded by the National Science Foundation. Research grants typically fund a few years of work, Vander Zanden explains, “But that would never allow you to detect these types of changes. It’s only through long-term research that we can get insights into these big questions like where invasive species are, how they are changing our ecosystems and how it all connects to things like climate change.” One such insight is that the presence of non-native aquatic species in Wisconsin lakes is more widespread than scientists and resource managers initially thought. The long-term research program has helped inform Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources maps and datasets on six target species since the 1990s: Eurasian watermilfoil, zebra mussels, spiny water fleas, rusty crayfish, Chinese mystery snail and the banded mystery snail. Combining long-term monitoring records on its 11 core study lakes with field-based research and community-based science on dozens of other water bodies, researchers revealed that existing estimates of about 8% of Wisconsin lakes containing one or more of the six species was way off. In fact, the number is closer to 39%. Additionally, certain invasive populations have been in waters much longer than initially thought. For example, researchers detected spiny water fleas in Lake Mendota in 2009, but scientists combing through sediment cores and old samples discovered that the disruptive invasive species had been present in the lake at least a decade sooner, with populations only erupting due to favorable changes in climate that summer. These findings suggest that invasive species are often simply present in an ecosystem without triggering negative impacts. What’s more, when invasive species do result in negative impacts, those impacts are often tied to existing problems, according to Jake Walsh, a co-author of the new paper and postdoctoral associate in the University of Minnesota’s Department of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Conservation Biology. “Lake Mendota was especially primed for large, costly effects from spiny water fleas,” says Walsh. “They worsened water quality problems that were already present and tied to excess nutrients in the lake.” Seeing this fuller picture was only possible through long-term research, Walsh adds. “As long as we have this long-range program, invasions are experiments that can teach us about how ecosystems work and how we can best manage them,” he says. This has given us a deep understanding of the water quality issues facing Lake Mendota and a ‘road map’ to follow for offsetting spiny water fleas’ impact.” Long-term science doesn’t just help scientists piece together the history of environmental change, Vander Zanden adds. With it, researchers can also highlight looming questions and design studies to answer them. From using environmental DNA, to exploring long-term invasive species removal benefits, more discoveries are on the horizon. And it’s not just the science that benefits from this long-term, interdisciplinary approach. Undergraduate field technicians who spent their summers sampling the same sites over and over have gone on to become professors overseeing their own research projects and managing their own students. Data scientists and staff dedicate huge chunks of time to making their datasets publicly available and accessible to other researchers in the freshwater sciences. It’s a spirit of collaboration and exploration that, Vander Zanden hopes, can extend to other fields. “I wonder if some of these patterns that we see from long-term data could be relevant to somebody who studies soil, or grassland flowers, or marine biology,” he says. “If invasive species are already there and more widespread than we think they are, things like human activity and climate change could soon be triggering more population shifts.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: limnology, research You may also like… Mapping methane emissions from rivers around globe reveals surprising sources Study finds that big rains bring big algae blooms… eventually Summer at UW–Madison’s Trout Lake Station means science (mostly)
Teaching, research lead UW to rise in worldwide rankings October 14, 2024 By Mike Klein On the first day of fall semester, students fill a Sterling lecture hall for their first Math 221 class. Photo: Althea Dotzour Strong performance in the categories of teaching and research environment helped the University of Wisconsin–Madison rise to 56th in the 2025 Times Higher Education World University Rankings released last week. This marks a two-year surge for UW in the rankings, thanks also to the university’s patents and growing research expenditures. “UW–Madison fosters a research environment that supports innovation and drives discovery,” says Dorota Grejner-Brzezinska, UW–Madison vice chancellor for research. “As an institution, we also prioritize leveraging our research advances to help benefit society, as reflected by the high number of inventions patented by our researchers each year.” The World University Rankings focus on three areas — research, impact and teaching — using five pillars supported by 18 performance indicators. “We create university rankings to assess university performance on the global stage and to provide a resource for readers to understand the different missions and successes of higher education institutions,” says the Times Higher Education website. Within the five pillars, UW ranked highest in teaching, at 43rd worldwide. That was supported by a 90.8 percentile ranking in institutional income, which “gives a broad sense of the infrastructure and facilities available to students and staff.” UW ranked 54th in research environment, led by a 94.2 percentile ranking in research income. In the most recent data provided by the National Science Foundation, UW–Madison’s research expenditures topped $1.5 billion, a 10 percent increase, ranking it 8th among public and private universities surveyed. Within the industry pillar, UW received a 100th percentile ranking for patents. According to the National Academy of Inventors, the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation ranked 12th nationwide and 16th worldwide in number of U.S. Utility patents issued in 2023. Times Higher Education also ranked universities in 11 specific subjects, in which UW ranked 17th in education, 25th in social sciences , 43rd in psychology, 44th in life sciences and 50th in physical sciences. UW–Madison has ranked highly in a number of other recent rankings. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email
‘Top Chef’ standout will whip up a speech for UW’s winter commencement October 29, 2024 By Doug Erickson For news media More information Dan Jacobs is the head chef and co-owner of acclaimed Milwaukee restaurants EsterEv, a globally inspired tasting menu concept, and Dandan, a modern Chinese American concept with Midwest sensibility. Milwaukee’s Dan Jacobs won the hearts of viewers last spring on Bravo’s “Top Chef” Wisconsin season. Now he’ll share his recipe for success with University of Wisconsin–Madison graduates as the keynote speaker for winter commencement Dec. 15. Jacobs was one of three finalists on the 21st season of the popular cooking competition series. He finished as a runner-up, making it all the way to the end without ever hearing those fateful words, “Please pack your knives and go.” Jacobs is the head chef and co-owner of acclaimed Milwaukee restaurants EsterEv, a globally inspired tasting menu concept, and Dandan, a modern Chinese American concept with Midwest sensibility. Jacobs and his business partner, Dan Van Rite, are five-time James Beard Best Chef Midwest semi-finalists, and 2024 James Beard Best Chef Midwest nominees. As a contestant on “Top Chef,” Jacobs spoke openly about his challenges with Kennedy’s Disease, a genetic neuromuscular ailment commonly mistaken for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). He was diagnosed in 2016. The disease often makes simple tasks like walking upstairs or chopping an onion feel like a massive undertaking. Jacobs said he applied to be on the show in part to encourage people with disabilities to pursue their passions. “During his time on ‘Top Chef,’ Dan Jacobs impressed us with his culinary skills and inspired us with his humanity,” Chancellor Jennifer L. Mnookin says. “Dan is someone at the top of his profession — a successful entrepreneur and business owner in an incredibly challenging and competitive industry. He’ll have a lot to share with our graduates about pursuing your dreams and doing so with resilience and heart.” Jacobs has had an impact far beyond the kitchen. He has raised more than $90,000 for Kennedy’s Disease awareness and is an active member of the Independent Restaurant Coalition. He was one of four Americans to speak to President-elect Joe Biden on behalf of independent restauranteurs, and he is deeply involved in many charitable efforts, including the Main Street Alliance, World Central Kitchen, No Kid Hungry, and the James Beard Foundation’s Climate Solutions for Restaurant Survival Campaign. UW–Madison commencement speakers are chosen by the senior class officers in consultation with the Chancellor’s Office. “Chef Dan is a role model for so many of us,” says Sam Mahlum, senior class president. “Through determination and perseverance, he turned his passion into a successful career. But beyond that, he epitomizes the aspirations of so many Badgers — to do good in this world and to live lives of integrity and compassion.” Jacobs is a Chicago native who began building strong ties to Wisconsin early in his career. A summer job as a short-order line cook for a breakfast restaurant in Fish Creek, Wisconsin, led to a position at the Inn at Cedar Crossing in Sturgeon Bay, Wisconsin. Jacobs has said the position cemented his love for food and convinced him to pursue his career as a professional chef. He took a few courses at the Cooking and Hospitality Institute of Chicago, then began cooking at many top-tier Chicago restaurants. He and his wife Kate moved to Milwaukee in 2011. Jacobs says his experience on “Top Chef” will inform the speech he gives to Badgers at the Kohl Center. “It was a crash course in tenacity, grit, and perseverance — all skills that are essential in life,” he says, “And that’s where the real growth happens. Competing on the show was proof to myself that my disability doesn’t have to limit or define my potential. I hope my journey inspires others, particularly those facing challenges, to pursue their passions and overcome adversity to reach their fullest potential.” He aspires to give a speech that’s authentic, honest, and inspiring. “I want to share the challenges I’ve faced, but also celebrate the journey itself. Success, for me, will be seeing some heads nodding, some smiles, and maybe a few moments of reflection where they realize that they, too, can overcome whatever life throws at them.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: commencement You may also like… 2022 UW–Madison winter commencement takes place on Sunday Winter commencement 2022: pomp, poignancy and — geez Louise! — Charlie Berens Unfinished business: Group of PhD students will walk in commencement 50 years after earning degrees
Photo gallery An up-close look at climate coverage October 23, 2024 By Elise Mahon Last week, University of Wisconsin–Madison students and researchers and members of the broader Madison community heard firsthand the importance of local journalism, especially when it comes to climate coverage. From Oct. 14-16, Great Lakes climate solutions reporter Isabelle “Izzy” Ross visited journalism classes, met with experts in clean energy and learned about Madison’s (and arguably the world’s) most studied lake, Lake Mendota. As this semester’s Sharon Dunwoody Science Journalist in Residence, Ross shared insight into her work as a reporter for both a Northern Michigan radio station, Interlochen Public Radio, and Grist, a digital climate solutions magazine with a national audience. On October 15 during the Wisconsin Science Festival, she gave a public talk at a flash talk-art fusion event, Big Ideas for Busy People: Fields of Wonder. Whether she was on stage at the Majestic Theatre, in the middle of Lake Mendota, or fielding questions in a room full of public affairs and journalism students, Ross shared the importance and value of building trust with the community you report in and for. 1 Isabelle “Izzy” Ross speaks with an attendee of the flash talk and arts celebration, Big Ideas for Busy People: Fields of Wonder, where she spoke to the public about her approach to climate solutions coverage and the importance of local journalism. Photo by ArrowStar Photography 2 At left, post-doctoral researcher Tyler Butts describes an overview of limnology research at UW–Madison as Ross takes notes while touring research facilities in the Water Science and Engineering Laboratory. Butts, who researches invasive species like zebra mussels, explains how they use the large tanks around them for various studies. Photo by: Jeff Miller 3 Butts, who is also captaining the pontoon boat, shares with Ross that Lake Mendota is one of the most studied lakes in the world. Hilary Dugan (right), associate professor of integrative biology, also shares some of her recent research that considers the environmental and societal consequences of loss of lake ice. Photo by: Jeff Miller 4 Ross even meets “David Buoy,” an anchored weather buoy, managed by the UW–Madison Department of Limnology and affectionately nicknamed after musician and singer David Bowie. The buoy floats above a deeper section of Lake Mendota and includes a 22-meter string of water-temperature sensors positioned every meter. Photo by: Jeff Miller 5 With the Wisconsin State Capitol rising from the Madison skyline behind her, Ross learns that limnology research doesn’t stop when the lakes freeze over. As Butts and Dugan explain, “David Buoy” will eventually be swapped out for other equipment that can continue measuring all sorts of data from the lake through the winter months. Photo by: Jeff Miller 6 At left, Ross listens to Samantha Summerfield, a PhD student in environmental chemistry & technology, talk about their PFAS (polyfluoroalkyl substances) research in Christy Remucal’s aquatic chemistry lab. Photo by: Jeff Miller 7 During the Wisconsin Science Festival’s Big Ideas for Busy People: Fields of Wonder event, Ross took the stage with several scientists and communicators to give an entertaining but informative line-up of flash talks to the Madison public. The science-focused talks were interspersed with artistic performances like dance and fiddle music. Ross focused on the importance of local climate reporting and building relationships with communities to learn about the climate issues they face – and care about – in their everyday life. Photo by ArrowStar Photography 8 During a lively Q&A session, Ross (center) answers an attendee’s question about the importance of local journalism in a time when people also face the ever-present flood of information from social media platforms. Photo by ArrowStar Photography See more photo stories Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: climate change, journalist in residence, recent sightings You may also like… Maraniss shares insights with journalism class Grad students work with climatologist on tool to alert communities to dangerous heat levels Building of Ho-Chunk structure on campus promotes awareness of Indigenous land history
Meet Sawyer Getschman, student speaker for Winter 2024 Commencement December 2, 2024 By Doug Erickson Sawyer Getschman is shown in a park in Seoul, South Korea, during her year abroad there. Submitted photo Sawyer Getschman had never heard of the University of Wisconsin–Madison when she started turning her attention to prospective colleges. She was attending high school in Germany at the time due to her father’s career as a U.S. Navy commander. “Basically, I did a lot of research about how students felt about the university they were attending,” says Getschman, who will be the student speaker this December for winter commencement. “UW–Madison had such a great reputation, and it also had one of the best East Asian language departments in the United States.” Getschman, who is earning a bachelor’s degree in East Asian languages and cultures, has no regrets about choosing UW–Madison. That’s part of the reason she applied to be the student commencement speaker. “I loved every minute of being at Madison,” she says. “I didn’t want to pass up the opportunity to share that in public.” The student speaker is chosen through a competitive process conducted by the senior class officers, in consultation with the Office of the Chancellor. All winter graduates were eligible to apply. UW–Madison’s Winter 2024 Commencement will take place at 10 a.m. on Sunday, Dec. 15 at the Kohl Center, 601 W. Dayton St. Getschman was born in Corpus Christi, Texas, but quickly became a citizen of the world. Her father’s job took the family to locales across the globe. During her youth, Getschman attended seven schools in four countries on three continents — including six years in Japan. (She is proud of having hiked to the top of Mount Fuji in Honshu, Japan, faster than her three older siblings.) She graduated as salutatorian from a high school on a military base in the United Kingdom. “It was challenging in some ways,” Getschman says of being a military kid, “but it was the only life I ever knew. Looking back, I’m very grateful for getting to see so much of the world at a young age.” Getschman studied Japanese in high school and also fell in love with Korean culture. Those interests drew her to UW–Madison’s East Asian languages program. In addition to her major, she is earning a certificate in teaching English to speakers of other languages. At UW–Madison, Getschman has been a member of the Korean learning community and a Korean peer language tutor. Her junior year, she served as vice president of Korean Happy Hour, a club that provides opportunities for students to speak Korean outside of class. Her senior year, she studied abroad in South Korea. “One of the great things about going to a big university like UW–Madison is that there are so many amazing opportunities,” says Getschman, who intends to pursue her dream job of teaching English in South Korea. “I’m excited to share my experiences and represent my fellow classmates at winter commencement.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: commencement You may also like… 2022 UW–Madison winter commencement takes place on Sunday Winter commencement 2022: pomp, poignancy and — geez Louise! — Charlie Berens Unfinished business: Group of PhD students will walk in commencement 50 years after earning degrees
Human stem cell-derived heart cells are safe in monkeys, could treat congenital heart disease November 13, 2024 By Jordana Lenon For news media More information Heart muscle cells grown from human induced pluripotent stem cells (in green) have successfully integrated into rhesus macaque heart muscle in this microscope image of heart tissue from a new study by UW–Madison and Mayo Clinic researchers. Photo courtesy Emborg Lab / UW–Madison Heart muscle cells grown from stem cells show promise in monkeys with a heart problem that typically results from a heart defect sometimes present at birth in humans, according to new research from the University of Wisconsin–Madison and Mayo Clinic. Heart disease, the No. 1 killer of Americans, can affect people at any time across their lifespans — even from birth, when heart conditions are known as congenital heart defects. Regenerating tissue to support healthy heart function could keep many of those hearts beating stronger and longer, and this is where stem cell research is stepping in. A research team led by Marina Emborg, professor of medical physics in the UW–Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, and Timothy Nelson, physician scientist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, reported recently in the journal Cell Transplantation that heart muscle cells grown from induced pluripotent stem cells can integrate into the hearts of monkeys with a state of pressure overload. Also referred to as right ventricular dysfunction, pressure overload often affects children with congenital heart defects. Patients experience chest discomfort, breathlessness, palpitations and body swelling, and can develop a weakened heart. The condition can be fatal if left untreated. Nearly all single ventricle congenital heart defects, particularly those in the right ventricle, eventually lead to heart failure. Surgery to correct the defect is a temporary solution, according to the researchers. Eventually, patients may require a heart transplant. However, the availability of donor hearts — complicated by the young age at which most patients require a transplant — is extremely limited. In their new study, the researchers focused on grafts of stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes as a possible complementary treatment to traditional surgical repair of cardiac defects. Their goal was to directly support ventricular function and overall healing. “There is a great need for alternative treatments of this condition,” says Jodi Scholz, the study’s lead author and chair of Comparative Medicine at Mayo Clinic. “Stem cell treatments could someday delay or even prevent the need for heart transplants.” The researchers transplanted clinical-grade human induced pluripotent stem cells — cells collected from human donors, coaxed back into a stem cell state and then developed into cell types compatible with heart muscle — into rhesus macaque monkeys with surgically induced right ventricular pressure overload. The cells successfully integrated into the organization of the surrounding host myocardium, the muscular layer of the heart. The animals’ hearts and overall health were closely monitored throughout the process. The authors noted that episodes of ventricular tachycardia (an increased heart rate) occurred in five out of 16 animals receiving transplanted cells, with two monkeys presenting incessant tachycardia. These episodes resolved within 19 days. “We delivered the cells to support existing cardiac tissue,” Emborg says. “Our goal with this particular study, as a precursor to human studies, was to make sure that the transplanted cells were safe and would successfully integrate with the organization of the surrounding tissue. We leveraged my team’s experience with stem cells and cardiac evaluation in Parkinson’s disease to assess this innovative therapeutic approach.” The research proved the feasibility and safety of using stem cells in the first nonhuman primate model of right ventricular pressure overload. Macaques, in particular, have been critical to advancing stem cell therapies for heart disease, kidney disease, Parkinson’s disease, eye diseases and more. “The demonstration of successful integration and maturation of the cells into a compromised heart is a promising step towards the clinical application for congenital heart defects,” Emborg says. The research was supported by the Todd and Karen Wanek Family Program for Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome and National Institutes of Health Grant P51OD011106 to the Wisconsin National Primate Research Center. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: animal research You may also like… UW researchers identify cell type that could be key to preventing marrow transplant complication Relieving stress in insulin-producing cells protects against Type 1 diabetes Mice eating less of specific amino acid — overrepresented in diet of obese people — live longer, healthier
H5N1 virus isolated from infected dairy worker is 100% lethal in ferrets, but does not appear to be circulating in nature anymore October 28, 2024 By Will Cushman For news media More information A dairy worker in Texas became infected with H5N1 avian influenza likely during the course of milking cows. A sample of the virus taken from the worker was 100% lethal in ferrets, though it spread inefficiently and does not appear to be continuing to spread. Photo: Althea Dotzour A strain of H5N1 avian influenza virus found in a Texas dairy worker who was infected this spring was able to spread among ferrets through the air, although inefficiently, and killed 100% of infected animals in studies University of Wisconsin–Madison researchers performed with the strain earlier this year. The good news: the dairy worker experienced mild symptoms and fully recovered, and the H5N1 strain that infected the worker does not appear to have continued spreading in the wild. Still, the findings highlight the risks posed by a virus that continues to spread among dairy cattle and occasionally to farm workers, and the study’s lead scientist says he was surprised by the ease with which this particular strain was able to kill ferrets. “This is one of the most pathogenic viruses I’ve ever seen in ferrets,” says Yoshihiro Kawaoka, a UW–Madison professor of pathobiological sciences who spearheaded the work, described Oct. 28, 2024, in the journal Nature. Ferrets are a common model for studying how influenza viruses that primarily affect birds are able to adapt to mammals, a topic that Kawaoka and his colleagues at UW–Madison’s Influenza Research Institute investigate since such a jump could trigger an influenza pandemic. Like other influenza viruses, H5N1 viruses mutate at a relatively rapid clip as they infect new hosts. Sometimes these mutations allow the viruses to more easily infect and spread among new species. That’s how the current viruses, which have been infecting birds around the world in recent years, began to spread among mammals, most notably North American dairy cattle in 2024. Kawaoka and his collaborators found that the H5N1 virus that infected the Texas dairy worker included a mutation that the team first identified in 2001 as important for causing severe disease. Luckily, Kawaoka says, the strain with that mutation seems to have died out. “This isolate is unique among the H5N1 viruses circulating in cows,” he says. Kawaoka hypothesizes that H5N1 viruses took two paths when they made the jump from birds to cows, both facilitated by mutations that made the virus better adapted to mammals. Kawaoka and his colleagues suggest that one path resulted in the more concerning mutation found in the Texas dairy worker, while the other led to a less dangerous mutation in the same protein. “Both mutations give the virus the ability to adapt to mammals, but the good thing is the one containing this more pathogenic mutation has not been detected again,” Kawaoka says. “So there are no extremely pathogenic H5N1 viruses currently circulating in cows. However, if a currently circulating cow H5N1 virus acquires that mutation, then that would be an issue.” Whether a virus with such a mutation would be dangerous for humans remains to be seen. “The puzzling thing is why the human who got this virus did not have a severe infection,” says Kawaoka, noting a few possibilities. Perhaps exposure to seasonal influenza viruses provides some level of protection via antibodies, or maybe the route of infection is important; the Texas dairy worker’s main symptom was conjunctivitis, suggesting the virus entered through the eye rather than the more typical respiratory route. Alternatively, more robust surveillance of influenza cases among American dairy workers since the virus began spreading on farms might mean more cases — including mild ones — are being identified. Another possibility is this particular strain might simply be less severe in humans than mammals like ferrets. “Those are all possibilities, but we don’t know,” says Kawaoka. “So, we’re now trying to understand why this virus is so pathogenic in ferrets and what that could mean for human infections.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: biology, research You may also like… New recipes for origin of life may point way to distant, inhabited planets First-in-kind psychedelic trials treat opioid and methamphetamine use disorders UW researchers identify cell type that could be key to preventing marrow transplant complication
Gene therapy protects against motor neuron disease in rats November 12, 2024 By Will Cushman For news media More information This image shows a section of brain tissue from a rat that received a gene therapy targeting the Trk-fused gene. A mutation in that gene is implicated in the development of certain motor neuron diseases. Green arrows highlight neurons expressing elevated levels of the gene following the therapy. Red arrows indicate other nerve cells called astrocytes that lack increased expression. Image courtesy of Anjon Audhya/UW–Madison University of Wisconsin–Madison researchers targeting a group of hereditary neurodegenerative diseases have found success using a gene therapy treatment in an animal model. The approach, which uses CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing technology, offers a unique and promising strategy that could one day treat rare but debilitating motor neuron diseases in humans. Hereditary spastic paraplegia, or HSP, is a group of movement disorders that cause progressive weakness and stiffness in the legs of people with certain inherited genetic mutations. The rare disorders usually lead to physical limitations and use of a wheelchair. Studying disease processes in animal models is an indispensable part of developing and testing any new treatments before they’re offered to humans. But scientists had historically struggled to replicate HSP’s symptoms and disease progression in animal models. Anjon Audhya That changed in 2022, when a group of UW–Madison scientists led by Anjon Audhya, a professor of biomolecular chemistry, used CRISPR-Cas9 technology to develop a rat model that carries a genetic mutation associated with HSP. The mutation is in the Trk-fused gene, which typically facilitates the transportation of proteins within nerve cells called neurons. When that function is disrupted in people — and rats — it leads to worsening symptoms of weakness and stiffness. Since 2022, Audhya and his colleagues have refined their rat model and begun testing therapeutic approaches for HSP. They recently developed a strategy that protects rats that carry a genetic mutation causing HSP from developing symptoms. That approach relies on a genetically engineered virus that targets neurons and introduces a normal version of the Trk-fused gene (which doesn’t include disease-causing mutations) to compensate for the mutated one. The scientists injected this engineered virus into the brains of day-old rats. “Those animals never got disease,” says Audhya. “So they were able to live for many, many additional weeks, never showing signs of disease. It’s a real demonstration that the gene therapy approach is highly effective in addressing disease symptomology.” Specifically, the gene therapy approach allowed the non-mutated gene to be expressed in neurons and better support the transportation of proteins, preventing disease. The group recently reported their findings in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Additionally, the researchers made a fundamental discovery about HSP — it’s primarily a disorder of neurons, rather than other cells found in the brain. When the team tested a similar strategy on cells called astrocytes, those animals still developed disease. Audhya and his colleagues are already moving on to follow-up studies developing another animal model and targeting a different gene mutation, which is more prevalent in HSP patients. They’re also planning to inject therapeutics via the spinal cord, which is closer to how treatment in humans would occur. Because HSP is a rare disease, funding for these studies can be difficult to secure. Audhya notes the support his team has received from Blu Genes Foundation, The Lilly and Blair Foundation and CureSPG4 Foundation has been a crucial part of their progress toward a potential cure for HSP. “We ultimately hope our preclinical gene therapy efforts will lead to a new clinical trial in patients in the years to come,” he says. Additional funding to support this project came from the National Institutes of Health (R01NS124165 and R35GM134865). Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: chemistry, genetics, research You may also like… Relieving stress in insulin-producing cells protects against Type 1 diabetes Remnant of cell division could be responsible for spreading cancer Zapping manure with special electrode promises an efficient method to produce fertilizers, other chemicals
Resources for UW-Madison students and employees December 16, 2024 2:15 pm Monday, Dec. 16 The City of Madison issued a statement about the Abundant Life School shooting that took place earlier today, including additional resources for anyone affected. 1 pm Monday, Dec. 16 The University of Wisconsin–Madison is offering resources and support to UW students and employees who may have been affected by a school shooting that took place at Abundant Life Christian School on Madison’s Far East Side on Dec. 16, as well as condolences to all those in the Madison community affected by the tragic incident. The situation is developing and the public safety response is being coordinated by the Madison Police Department and there is no ongoing threat to the community. The situation did not take place in downtown Madison. Students Counseling and crisis support as a result of this incident or any other situation may be obtained by calling University Health Services at (608) 265-5600. If you need immediate assistance, call the UHS Crisis Line at (608) 265-5600, option 9. For more information, visit uhs.wisc.edu. Students may also contact the Office of Student Assistance and Support (formerly, the Dean of Students Office.) Employees Staff and faculty who would like to talk to someone in response to this or any other situation may contact the Employee Assistance Office at (608) 263-2987 for an appointment. For immediate, 24/7 counseling support, employees are encouraged to contact LifeMatters at 800-634-6433. More information about both services is available online at eao.wisc.edu. UW–Madison community This incident did not occur at UW–Madison and is not connected to campus, but UWPD encourages all students and employees to contact them immediately by calling 911 if they experience safety concerns on campus. For non-emergencies, UWPD can be reached at (608) 264-COPS or through the BadgerSAFE app. Additional resources for safety and security are available. Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email
Threat of abrupt mortality events keeps endangered monkey population at risk, despite decades of growth December 16, 2024 By Elise Mahon For news media More information Karen Strier has been studying this population of northern muriquis for over 40 years. Photo by Joao Marcos Rosa Despite the population being almost four times larger than it was in 1982, a new study published in the journal Ecology suggests the northern muriqui monkeys remain at risk, especially in the face of ongoing habitat disturbances. Northern muriquis, which live in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil, are much more peaceful and egalitarian compared to other primates. They are also one of the most endangered species of monkey in the world. Karen Strier, a professor of anthropology at UW–Madison and lead author of the paper, has spent 40 years studying the behavior and ecology of these monkeys in a small, preserved portion of Brazilian forest. She teamed up with Anthony Ives, a professor of ecology and evolution at UW–Madison, who is well versed in modeling demographic changes over time. “My goal is simply to put into statistics what Karen already knows,” Ives says. “She knows her data so well, and long-term studies with this level of detail for an endangered species are very rare.” In the future, conservationists could use Strier’s data to back efforts to improve habitat quality and further protect the peaceful monkeys. Photo by Carla B. Possamai / Projeto Muriqui de Caratinga Strier and her team of Brazilian colleagues not only count the number of animals but also track their unique behavior, birth rates, death rates and relationships with one another. They know these animals as individuals, not just data points. While the species and the land they live on is protected by Brazilian law, the muriquis’ mortality rate rose suddenly in 2016 and has not fallen since. Strier and Ives have found that the animals are still reproducing at a steady rate, pointing to other causes for the population decline. “Our data imply that there may be some environmental stressors in the habitat such as a decline in forest productivity, which affects food availability, climate stress or predation causing the elevated mortality,” Strier explains. The study also confirms the benefit of long-term, detailed studies such as this. By 2015, this population of muriquis had grown to a remarkable 356 animals, compared to the roughly 50 animals it consisted of when Strier had begun her data collection in 1982. Ives used data from the first 33 years of Strier’s study to create a model of what the population should look like over the next several decades under the conditions of 2015. It predicted the population would continue to rise exponentially until it reached a carrying capacity of about 500 animals, hovering around that size for the next few decades. What that model couldn’t predict though, was the two years of drought that began in 2014 or the bout of yellow fever that swept through the population in 2016. “If you just had data up to 2015, you’d say the population is great!” Ives explains. But luckily, Strier and her team continued to collect data beyond the drought and the yellow fever epidemic, making it possible to document the ongoing impact of habitat changes. When Ives modeled the population changes, accounting for this dramatic decrease from 2016 to 2022, he found the population’s predicted carrying capacity to be only about 200 animals. And that’s assuming there won’t be another abrupt change to mortality like the one that started in 2016. With predation and habitat change pinpointed as possible limiting factors for this muriqui population, conservationists are getting a clearer idea of where and how action may need to be taken. “As almost all previous work from Karen, this will open a new window to understand and improve the design of our [conservation] strategies,” says Leandro Jerusalinsky, the head of the National Center for Research and Conservation of Brazilian Primates, part of the Ministry of Environment in Brazil. Muriquis monkeys are a peaceful egalitarian species, something uncommon for large primates. Strier and her team know each animal in the Caratinga population as individuals and track their behaviors as part of the long-term study. Photo by Carla B. Possamai / Projeto Muriqui de Caratinga Strier’s data can also be used alongside different models to predict how other populations of muriquis may react to changes in climate and future diseases. Those challenges grow increasingly more likely as climate models predict a warmer, drier world, resulting in increased environmental stress and food scarcity for muriquis and other primates. Jerusalinsky hopes the data will help them understand what conditions these populations need to survive in the face of a changing world. Eventually it could inform conservation policies that might improve habitat quality management or create habitat corridors between isolated populations of the muriquis. “Having a person like Karen developing this long-term research and providing these high-quality results is incredible,” Jerusalinsky says. “Even in the desperation we have facing this situation of (the muriquis), this gives us a lot of hope in effectively designing the best strategies possible to try to save this species.” Share via Facebook Share via X, formerly Twitter Share via Linked In Share via email Tags: anthropology, College of Letters & Science
Teacher, student dead, 6 injured in shooting at Abundant Life Christian School | Live updates
The Badger Herald

The University of Wisconsin women’s hockey team (19-1, 13-1 WCHA) played its final matches before its nearly month-long break Dec. 7 against Minnesota State, winning both games in the series by a combined 7-1 score.
The Badgers have enjoyed another week as the unanimous No. 1 team in the country. This season, Wisconsin has dominated nearly every matchup they have played in, only losing a 3-2 thriller away against one of their biggest rivals, Ohio State.
In the case the results don’t speak for themselves, the stats certainly do. The Badgers dominate the standings ingoals scoredas the only team to score more than 100 goals this season with 114, which is 28 more goals than Clarkson, the next-highest team.
Wisconsin also dominates in scoring margins, only conceding 19 goals in 20 games, meaning they score 4.75 goals per goal they concede. Defensively, the team is also one of the best in the country, leading with nine shutouts and only allowing a 10th-best 399 shots.
Individually, the Badgers also dominate thetable. Four Badgers sit inside the top five for assists per game, with fifth yearCasey O’Brienleading the way with 32 assists in 20 games, seven assists more than juniorCaroline Harvey, who holds second place.
All signs point to the Badgers making another run to the National Collegiate Women’s Ice Hockey Championship, which isn’t until the end of March. At this point last season, Wisconsin had already lost four games, two against Ohio State and one each against Minnesota Duluth and Minnesota.
Despite the setback, the Badgers came back from break and won 14 games straight last year, only dropping one more game in the penultimate game of the season, again against Ohio State. The Badgers ended up winning the final game of the season, beating Ohio State for the first time that year, but the Buckeyes would end up with the last laugh, beating the Badgers 1-0 in the championship.
Ohio State, however, has not enjoyed the same success it had last year. Last season the Buckeyes lost four out of 39 games. This season they have lost six games, two of them in overtime, and they see themselves sitting infourthplace in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association behind Minnesota Duluth and Minnesota.
The season is far from over for the Badgers, as they have a month to prepare for the final series against Ohio State during the regular season Jan. 2-4 and the whole second half of the season to prepare for the postseason where they might meet the Buckeyes again.
Legendary head coachMark Johnsonhas proven time and time again that Badger women’s hockey fans have nothing to worry about, leading the team to seven national championships in his 22 years at the helm while also becoming the winningest coach in NCAA collegiate women’s hockey history with over 600 wins under his belt.
If the first half of the season was any indication, Badgers fans can prepare for more dominant performances on both sides of the puck. The season-defining series against Ohio State could give the Badgers all the confidence they need to make a strong run to another national championship.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

It is no surprise that fifth-yearSarah Franklinwas able to win another Big Ten’s Player of the Year title. Last year she exceeded expectations, earning the award with a total of 497 kills, sitting at a 0.298 hitting percentage, as well as 15 aces for the outside hitter.
In the 2024 season, she surpassed these statistics only halfway through. After the Badger win against Texas A&M on Dec. 13, Franklin shot a total of 523 kills over the net and more than doubled her aces from her previous season to 39.
To say Franklin was ready for theNo. 6 Texas A&Mmatchup was an understatement. On Dec. 5, Franklin added another 12 kills to her career, as well as eight digs againstFairfieldto start the Big Ten Tournament. The following night againstNo. 7 Georgia Tech, the squad was able to advance yet again after a 3-1 match win. Star hitter Franklin led with 20 kills, following seniorAnna Smrekwith 13.
Franklin was not the only standout player in tournament play. Coming off of an injury, freshmanLola Schumacherled the team with 14 digs and three assists against Fairfield.
FreshmanCharlie Fuerbringershined both offensive and defensively on Dec. 6 against Georgia Tech. Not only was she able to score the only four Wisconsin aces, but Fuerbringer led with 49 assists and 21 digs for the match.
The No. 2 Wisconsin showed they were ready to put up a long fight with their match against Texas A&M, playing a full 5 sets. A back and forth battle between the two, Wisconsin took the first, third, and fifth sets, winning then 25-21, 25-29 and 15-13 respectively. The Aggies won only the second and fourth at 25-18 and 25-23.
Franklin led the squad with 21 kills, which made this her 23rd match straight reaching double digit kills. JuniorCarter Boothfollowed suit by scoring her career high of 14 kills.
After a long hiatus due to injury, junior defensive specialistGulce Guctekingot back in the game reaching 13 digs for the Badgers with her partner, Schumacher grabbing 24 digs next to her.
Fuerbringer continued to lead the Badger squad with 56 assists, only three less points from her career high on Nov. 27 against Ohio State.
With all three of these wins the Badgers were set to play againstNo. 1 Nebraskaon Dec. 15 in the regional final. Nebraska was behind three of the four Big Ten losses for Wisconsin, so the squad had to bring a fight to the regional final.
To start the first set, Guctekin was able to keep a 4-0 serving run going, setting up seniorJulia Orzolfor a kill and block. Fuerbringer added two out of her three total aces for the match. Keeping the set neck and neck, Smrek hit over two kills for a tie game at 24-24. However, Nebraska won the set 26-24.
The second set started strong with a huge lead from Nebraska at 8-2, and that momentum continued to a ten point lead at 14-4. SeniorCC Crawfordgot her first kill for the night, but the set went to Nebraska with a score of 25-17.
Nebraska took the final set and match after a tough battle given from the Badgers. Franklin got another kill for the match bringing her total to 12 kills for the night. The squad continued swinging, but with a few hitting errors the team trailed behind, bringing the final score the 25-21 for the Huskers.
As the season comes to a close it is clear to see that head coach Kelley Sheffield is going to miss his seniors and fifth years, but is ready for the next season to begin. This was the 14thconsecutive seasonthe Badger squad recorded 20 or more wins with coach Sheffield at the helm.
Franklin finished her career in Madison recording the seventh-highest career total kills at 1,421.
This season will be one for the books, and Wisconsin’s hitters will be missed. Being able to watch Franklin, Smrek, Crawford, Orzol,Devyn RobinsonandCarly Andersongive it their all this season has been a delight.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The University of WisconsinBadgers volleyball team is coming to the end of their season. With only one game left in their conference season, it will be a crucial moment for players to demonstrate their ability to rise to the occasion.
In the past several games, redshirt freshmanSaige Damrowhas shown her adaptability on the court. Her first starting game was Nov. 16 against No. 12UCLAwhere she had the most digs of any player on the night with 15. She also was able to add two assists and an ace.
In her next match against No. 7Minnesota,she got 21 digs for the squad and was diving for every ball possible.
Despite numerous digging errors, her efforts cannot go unnoticed. Damrow was redshirted from injuries last season and required two surgeries. There was a chance she wouldn’t be given the opportunity to play again. Given the opportunity to play again, she has embraced it wholeheartedly, showcasing unwavering dedication on the court.
With defensive specialist, juniorGulce Guctekinout with injuries, freshmanMaile Chancame in as a replacement. During her time in the UCLA match, she showed how reliable she can be for her team.
Given that Chan and Darrow are stepping up in these big matches against UCLA and Minnesota, it is safe to say that next season will have a good balance of new and returning players.
All four back-row specialists will be in back for the 2025 season, so there will be no shortage of experienced players and will allow more time for Damrow and Chan to learn from Guctekin once healed.
As for the front row, freshmanCharlie Fuerbringerhas been starting the entirety of this season as the squad’s setter. Her talent is shown in her numerous assists throughout the season. She recorded 32 assists Nov. 18 against No. 16 Iowa, followed by 38 assists the next day against No. 2 Penn State.
Fuerbringer hasn’t just been assisting though, coming alive on the defensive side with 25 digs Nov. 20 against Minnesota. Fuerbringer has also mastered the side set overkill, getting five on Sep. 2 againstStanford University.
On the season, Fuerbringer has gotten 987 assists, averaging out to 10.73 assists per set. As well as 54 total kills giving her a 0.308 hitting percentage.
She has shown her strength this season and it will be powerful to have her back next year covering the middle court.
JuniorCarter Boothwill also be returning to the squad next season as a middle blocker. This season she has maintained a 0.320 hitting percentage with 126 total hits, 88 fewer hits than her previous season with the Badgers, though attributable to the priority that has been placed on outside hitters.
It would be no surprise that without fifth yearsSarah FranklinandDevyn Robinson, and seniorsAnna SmrekandJulia Orzolas outside hitters, Booth will be a highlighted attacker.
Losing their star hitter, Franklin, will obviously be a hard hit, but being surrounded by underclassmen this season has been a great opportunity for her to relay her knowledge of the game to them.
FreshmanUna Vajagic, an outside hitter from Novi Sad, Serbia, is one example of a player who is getting the practice in with starting hitters like Franklin and Robinson. Though she’s seen no playing time as of this season, Vajagic has been able to spend the entire year practicing with these star upperclassmen.
There’s also freshmanTrinity Shadd-Ceres, an outside hitter from Ontario, Canada, who has gotten minutes in four games this season. Shadd-Ceres scored 4 kills for the Badgers on Sep. 1 against Texas. The experience she got this season has been enough to show that she has real potential for the Badgers in her following seasons.
It is now up to head coachKelly Sheffieldto recruit a few more outside hitters who can begin to perform for Wisconsin. Defensively, the squad will not change much, but the offensive game will be hit hard from the loss of our great players Franklin, Orzol, Robinson, Smrek,Carly AndersonandCC Crawford.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The University of Wisconsin Badgers came into Saturday’s game hoping to continue their great performance against the No. 1 ranked Michigan State Friday night, where they handed the Spartans their second loss of the season, winning four to zero, and extending their unbeaten streak to five games.
To add on to the magnitude of this game, former NHL star and Badger hockey greatJoe Pavelskiwas in the house, set to behonoredfor his recent retirement from professional hockey. Pavelski, a Badger from 2005-2006, played 18 seasons in the NHL for the San Jose Sharks and the Dallas Stars.
Along with countless other accomplishments, Pavelski was commemorated for his success at the university, and his strong representation of Badger hockey in the NHL and the Olympics. Pavelski holds the NHL record for playoff goals by an American, was the only Badger to record at least 1000 points in the NHL and was a two-time Olympian.
Before the game, Pavelski participated in a ceremonial puck drop, setting the stage for an electric night at the Kohl Center. Pavelski was later joined on the ice by many of his former Wisconsin teammates.
The game’s opening goal was scored on a power play by graduate studentOwen Lindmarkoff of a slashing penalty by Michigan State’s Issac Howard. The Badgers ran up the stat board this period as well, with 11 shots on goal, nine faceoff wins and four blocks in that period alone, looking on track to possibly pull off the upset again.
Wisconsin started the second period strong as well, with a couple of high-risk shots eventually leading to a close-range goal by juniorChristian Fitzgerald, assisted by juniorKyle Kukkonenand sophomoreZach Schulz.
However, things began to go downhill for Wisconsin when they were assessed a bench penalty for too many men on the ice a few minutes later. Michigan State took advantage of this opportunity, scoring halfway through the power play courtesy of Charlie Stramel.
The morale was high entering the third period, following the honoring of Pavelski, and Wisconsin started strong again with multiple great shots in the first minute. But Michigan State was able to quickly rain on their party, with a goal by Joey Larson to tie the game.
When a penalty was assessed on Mikey DeAngelo of Michigan State for tripping, it felt as though this was the Badgers’ chance to pull back ahead. Despite many high-risk shots for Wisconsin on the power play, none of them were able to connect, and Michigan State was able to make a clean escape.
Still tied 2-2 at the end of the third, we entered overtime, which began with some very strong saves from seniorTommy Scarfone, allowing the Badgers to attack. But Michigan State was able to take advantage of a slight defensive zone misstep by the Badgers, and scored behind Scarfone, from Issac Howard with a precise pass by Matt Basgall.
The Badgers lost in an overtime heartbreaker 3-2 to Michigan State, however still picking up a point as they were able to force overtime.
The Badgers will look to bounce back from this tight game on Friday, Dec. 13 in Ann Arbor, Mich. against the Michigan Wolverines.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The No. 11 University of Wisconsin men’s basketball team (8-1, 0-1 Big Ten) faced off against the No. 23 University of Michigan (7-1, 1-0) at the Kohl Center in Madison, WI. The Badgers fell just three points short, suffering a scoring drought with zero points in the last 2:37 of the game.
Transfer John Tonje led the team with 18 points, scoring 6 points in the first half and 12 in the second, shooting 5-12 from the inside and 3-5 from beyond the line. Tonje held an impressive record shooting 5-6 in free throws having a 93.7% from inside the paint so far this season.
The 6 foot 4 starter John Blackwell followed suit with 16 points, shooting six in the first and 10 in the second, 6-12 in the paint and a slim 0-1 in 3-pointers. Blackwell led the Badgers on Tuesday night with nine rebounds.
Starting sophomore Nolan Winter tallied eight points with three crowd-pleasing dunks and two assists.
The match-up was a nail-biting back-and-forth possession game with the Michigan Wolverines narrowly pulling through in a point surge led by Vlad Goldin with a career-high of 24 points on Tuesday night.
The game began with a lead by the Badgers, Tonje effectively running the pick-and-roll, nailing a jumper in the transition. Max Klesmit went 1-for-3 beyond the arc, contributing six points to the first. The Badgers managed to pull a lead through the first half at 32 points, shooting 32.3% from the field (10-31).
Danny Wolf led the Michigan Wolverines with nine points (3-5) in the first, along with six rebounds. Vlad Goldin chipped in with a rebound and block ending the first with seven points.
The Badgers second half was led by Tonje, going 4-4 at the paint and 3-6 in the field, with Blackwell pulling through with five rebounds. Michigan relied on Goldin’s whopping 17 points and Wolf’s 66.7% shooting efficiency in the second half, the duo creating multiple opportunities for Goldin’s second-half contributions.
Wisconsin’s poor shooting from the 3-point range and lack of scoring consistency prevented the Badgers from taking control over the second half, the game ending in a narrow 3-point lead by the Michigan Wolverines.
UW players debuted the ‘By the Players’ alternate jerseys in partnership with Under Armor. This marks the fifth edition of ‘By the Players’ uniforms that allow players to help design, in this case, seniors Kamari McGee and Max Klesmit were involved with designing the jerseys showcasing Madison’s skyline and the iconic Bucky Badger.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

Chair of the Democratic Party of Wisconsin Ben Wikler isrunningfor chair of the Democratic National Committee. Wikler’s candidacy comes after the party’s previous chair, Jaime Harrison, chose not to seek reelection. Wikler is among otherprominent Democratic leadersvying for the position including former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley, Minnesota’s Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party Chair Ken Martin and Sen. James Skoufis, D-N.Y.
The Chair election is set for Feb. 1, just two weeks after the inauguration of Donald Trump will occur. The majority vote of448 party members, which includes 200 elected state and territorial members, affiliate group members and delegates at-large will determine the victor.The election will reflect Democrats’ response to Trump’s victory through the leader’s tone towards the Trump administration and plan to move the party forward.
Dismay with the party’s angle in the previous presidential election is represented in declining faith in the party. According to Pew Research Center, the percentage of Democratic or lean Democratic voters who are optimistic about the party’s directiondropped from 72%in 2022 to only 51% in 2024 while Republican optimism increased by 21% from 2022-2024. The next DNC chair must focus on positive Democratic policies rather than anti-Trump rhetoric in order to regain support for the party.
Wikler’s successes in Wisconsin and his vision for the party make him the clear choice to kickstart much-needed reform. He has served aschair of the Democratic Party of Wisconsinsince 2019 and led the state to historic victories including former President Joe Biden’s win in 2020 and Gov. Tony Evers’ reelection in 2022.
This emphasizes Wikler’s ability to unite the Democratic voter base, independents and traditionally Republican voters to fulfill his motto — “Fight, Include, Respect and Empower.”
Under Wikler’s lead,voter registration in Wisconsinhas greatly increased. In 2024 there were 3,658,236 registered voters in Wisconsin versus just 3,252,407 in 2018. While the number of voters peaks in presidential election years, Wisconsin registration in 2022 hit 3,534,794, which is 280,00 more than 2018.
This increase in engagement can be partially credited to political organizations under Wikler’s leadership, including WisDems, for their ability to mobilize voters during midterm election years.
When assessing Wikler’s record, one may question his qualifications due to the results of the 2024 presidential election in Wisconsin — however, this experience provides Wikler the knowledge necessary to influence the Democratic Party. His actions on a national level can thus be supported by lessons learned at the state level about spreading awareness and increasing voter turnout.
Despite the 2024 presidential election results, Harris wonmore votesin Wisconsin than Biden did in 2020. In the 2024 election, the Wisconsin Democratic party helped Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Wis., win reelection, ended the GOP supermajority in the Wisconsin State Senate and flipped 10 State Assembly, all reasons to maintain faith in WisDems and Wikler’s leadership.
Working as a party leader in a swing state has also provided Wikler with an advantage over the other candidates who come from theliberal strongholdsof Minn., Md. and N.Y. Wikler has leveled with rural voters, appealed to a broad spectrum of democrats and mobilized the party in razor thin elections — challenges some of his competitors have not faced.
The ability to gain support from rural voters was evident in Baldwin’s successful campaign. She was endorsed by the Wisconsin Farm Bureau Federation, the first timein over 20 yearsthat a statewide Democrat has earned their endorsement.
This endorsement gave her increased credibility with Wisconsinites who work on both large and small farms across the state, and Wikler should strive to prioritize rural Americans and labor organizations in future campaigns.
Following the recent election and Trump’s victory, many within the Democratic Party have called on leaders to take aserious look at their approach, and Wikler can provide the critical yet hopeful outlook necessary to affect positive change. Within his campaign platform, Wikler notes that Democratsneed a reckoning and not recriminations,which furthers his focus on improvement rather than assigning blame.
Wikler understands the economically and socially diverse voter base in Wisconsin as well as the concerns of young, urban voters in cities like Madison. His practical knowledge of successful Democratic messaging and groundwork in a battleground state is a unique asset he can leverage to lead the party to national success.
Wikler must also establish that the party is both open to public critique and willing to fight for its core values. Following the election, many voiced dissatisfaction with Democrats’ historical support of “identity politics,” which includes the affirmation of marginalized groups’ rights.
Current DNC ChairHarrison pushed backagainst this complaint by explaining that the party must assure minority voters that the Democratic Party supports them. This comes at a time when50% of Americansbelieve the GOP represents “people like them” somewhat or very well while only 43% believe that to be the case in the Democratic Party.
Wikler understands the challenges of a fragmented, pessimistic voter base and must strive for positive change within the party to regain support from rural, minority, and young voters. He can increase mass appeal while staying true to liberal values, and his demonstrated ability “Tounite. To fight. And to win” defines him as the most qualified candidate.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

Abortion access and reproductive rights have been highly debated sinceRoe v. Wadewas overturned nearly two years ago. This decision has led to significant shifts in healthcare accessibility across states. In Wisconsin, access to abortion hasfluctuated, from disappearing entirely to returning under strict limitations.
Currently, Wisconsin bans abortion at and after 20 weeks, requiring patients to make two separate trips-one for in-person counseling and another at least 24 hours later for the procedure,according to ABC News.
“For purposes of this prohibition, an unborn child is considered capable of experiencing pain if the probable age of the unborn child is 20 or more weeks post-fertilization,” according to theWisconsin Legislative Council.
While this restricts access to reproductive healthcare, abortion remains an option in the state — a stark contrast to states like Texas.
As of 2024, Texas enforces one of the most restrictive abortion bans in the country, prohibiting nearly all abortions even without exceptions for rape or incest. Physicians performing abortions in Texas face severe penalties, including $100,000 fines or first-degree felony charges, which can lead to life imprisonment,according to Guttmacher.
This law has had devastating consequences. For instance, deaths due to birth defects in Texas increased by 23%, with infant deaths rising to nearly 13% compared to a 1.8% increase nationally.
For nearly 50 years since it was originally instated in 1973, Roev. Wadeprotected abortion rights. Why, after decades, was it overturned in 2021, and what role does this decision play in the history of abortion in Wisconsin?
Public perceptions of abortion have always shaped healthcare policies and access. Donald Trump and other far-right politicians largely championed the overturning ofRoe v. Wade. For instance, Trump often goes as far as falsely claiming Kamala Harris supports “post-birth abortions,” according toNPR. The former president ultimately nominated Justice Brett Kavanaugh who tilted the Supreme Court in favor of the Republican Party in hopes that he would vote to overturnRoe v. Wade,according to FindLaw.
Though one might believe that public perceptions of abortion shape abortion policies, thePew Research Centerfound that Americans’ views about abortion have not changed since beforeRoe v. Wadewas overturned. In fact, nearly 60% of the American public disagrees with the Court’s decision.
This decision has further deepened existing inequalities in abortion access. Specifically, the removal of federal protection for reproductive rights disproportionately impacts Black, Latino, Indigenous and low-income communities,according to ABC News. These groups already face systemic healthcaredisparities, including higher health risks, less insurance coverage and worse maternal health outcomes. The increased restrictions have further exacerbated these inequities.
While the re-election of  Trump and the conservative majority in the Senate, House and Supreme Court does not paint a bright future for pro-choice individuals and advocates of reproductive rights, change is still possible at the state level.
Wisconsin Senator, and recent elect Tammy Baldwin, has fought for freedom of choice. She prides herself on being a “staunch advocate for people with uteruses’ freedoms” and even wrote the Women’s Health Protection Act to guarantee equal access to abortion everywhere in the United States,according to her campaign. State legislators have the power to enact certain policies that provide more access and care for abortions. As such, state-level and local elections may gain unprecedented importance.
Advocacy groups must continue to fight for reproductive rights, as well.Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin, for example, is exploring ways to expand access to abortion services within the confines of state laws. The organization remains committed to the belief that individuals have the right to make decisions about their own bodies, lives and futures, according tothe website.
Through its “Bans Off Our Bodies” campaign, Planned Parenthood hosts rallies, organizes donation drives and provides volunteer opportunities to support people with uteruses and marginalized communities affected by these restrictions. Michelle Velasquez, the organization’s chief strategy officer, has outlined plans to restore, protect and expand reproductive rights in Wisconsin.
These include repealing restrictive laws through the legislature or challenging them in court. A successfullawsuitcould pave the way for broader access by enabling telemedicine services, removing mandatory waiting periods and allowing advanced nurse practitioners to administer medication abortions.
Telemedicine, or telehealth, is a key component of Planned Parenthood’s strategy to expand reproductive healthcare. This approach enables patients to receive medical care remotely through electronic technologies, making healthcare more accessible, especially for underserved and rural communities. Telemedicine is particularly effective in states with stringent abortion restrictions.
A study published inNature Medicinefound that 99.8% of patients who received abortion pills via telemedicine experienced no serious adverse events. By eliminating systemic and political barriers to healthcare, telemedicine has the potential to be a great equalizer in reproductive health access.
The issue of abortion access goes far beyond political debates or news headlines because it has profound implications for real people. People with uteruses and girls across the country face life-threatening consequences, including dangerous pregnancies that result in fatalities for both infants and mothers.
Many are forced to travel long distances across state lines for basic medical care. People of color with uteruses or low-income people with uteruses bear the brunt of these restrictions due to systemic healthcare inequities.
Federal and state policymakers need to expand access to abortions through various policies that they are responsible for passing. It is their job toinstill the right to an abortion in the state constitution, which is one of the strongest actions to establish long-term protections for abortion rights and access. For now, it is pivotal for states to strengthen protections to shield people from legal risk, particularly those historically targeted or marginalized by the legal system.
This situation highlights a broader issue of suppressed individual freedoms in the United States and raises the question: Is this the beginning of a larger, dangerous political trend?
Lily Morningstar is a senior majoring in journalism ([email protected]).
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

If you spend enough time around computer science majors, one of the things you’re likely to hear is a long series of complaints about course enrollment. That’s been my experience living with two CS majors, and after two years of hearing about the shortcomings of the course enrollment process in the CS department, I decided to take a closer look at the problem myself. Here’s what I learned:
Difficulty with course enrollment is a common experience for CS students at UW.
To better understand the enrollment problems facing UW’s CS students, I created a short survey and had a friend share it on two popular WhatsApp and Discord forums. The survey generated 10 responses and reflected a general sentiment of dissatisfaction, though most students stopped short of reporting that an inability to enroll in CS courses was directly impacting their degree path.
Eight out of 10 students either agreed or strongly agreed with the claim that they have more difficulty enrolling in CS courses than in other courses. Another eight out of 10 students also either agreed or strongly agreed with the statement that “course enrollment is a significant problem in the CS department.”
But, seven out of 10 students polled either disagreed or strongly disagreed with the statement that difficulty enrolling in the CS courses they want to take has changed their degree paths. Further, on average, CS students actually tend to graduate in less time than students in most other majors, according to CS Department Administrator for Academic Services Cindy Fendrick.
While overcrowding in CS is not unusual, UW’s open-access model is.
With high starting salaries, good job prospects and a cutting-edge skill set, CS has taken higher education by storm in the last 15 years. For instance, in the 2008-2009 academic year, the College of Letters and Science produced more Art History degrees — 62 — than Computer Science degrees — 60 — according to UW’sRepository of Administrative Data and Reports.
Since then, CS has become a campus juggernaut, producing 877 undergraduate degrees in the 2023-2024 academic year — more than Business and Biology degrees combined.
And this isn’t just a UW phenomenon. Across the country, universities have been scrambling to meet the surge in demand for CS degrees, and many of UW’s peer schools have been forced to move to a closed-access model, meaning they independently restrict who can major in CS, according toInside Higher Ed.
In 2023, for instance, the University of Michigan moved to a closed-access model, mandating that students apply directly to the major, according to theMichigan Daily. Hoping to minimize overcrowding and address equity concerns, the University of California San Diego instituted a lottery system in 2017, making the declaration of their CS major literally the luck of the draw, according toInside Higher Ed.
Nationwide, increased demand for computer science has forced university administrators and computer science department leaders to make difficult decisions about who to grant access to the major and who to leave behind. UW, though, has managed to maintain its open-degree model throughout — a point of pride within UW’s CS department.
“The Department of Computer Sciences is proud to offer an academic degree accessible to all students who meet the major declaration requirements,” Fendrick said in an email statement regarding UW’s open-degree model. “Many Computer Science departments nationwide have transitioned to a limited-access model, where only a specific number of students can complete the degree. While our open-degree model offers more flexibility, it does present challenges, one of which is course seat scheduling.”
Bottlenecks and prerequisites
The struggle to accommodate a rapidly growing degree-seeking population lies largely in finding the personnel to educate these students. Fendrick said that most departments at UW have research tenure-track faculty and academic staff faculty, sometimes called teaching faculty.
Teaching faculty, as the name suggests, specialize in instruction, and recently the CS department has greatly increased its teaching faculty and to a lesser extent its research tenure-track faculty. The department has also turned to local talent for lectures, extending offers to experts from Google, Microsoft and Epic.
The department has also taken measures to offset overcrowding by expanding the course catalog to include classes that don’t count towards degree progression but still offer valuable skills and help distribute the weight, as in their mobile applications class, according to Fendrick.
Despite this, many students report running into bottlenecks in their degree progression, sometimes having to wait multiple semesters to take required classes. Eight out of 10 students polled reported they were unable to take CS 354, a core requirement of the major, in the desired semester.
Another student left a comment stating that they couldn’t schedule Starfish meetings within the CS department as they were all booked. A second student reported that they were unable to enroll in any of the CS courses he wanted to take next semester due to small class sizes, TA shortages and the fact that some CS classes — like CS 407 — aren’t offered every semester.
I asked one student, sophomore Farhan Siddiqui, about his experience trying to enroll in CS 354, and he told me that he has tried and failed for two semesters now.
“You can’t graduate if you don’t take this class,” Siddiqui said. “I wanted to take it last semester, but I couldn’t — I couldn’t even waitlist myself because it was closed. I thought: ‘Alright, I’ll take it in my Sophomore Spring semester.’ I tried that, again it’s closed. I can’t even waitlist.”
CS 354 is currently facing reduced class sizes due to an instructor change, Fendrick said.
The Bottom Line
UW’s CS department is packed — there’s no doubt about it. The department has had to adjust to a meteoric rise in popularity among undergraduates, and yet, unlike many of their peers, they have not instituted a limited-access model.
The obvious downside is that, even though students are not directly excluded from the degree program, competition for classes and resources nevertheless excludes students indirectly. On the other hand, any student who maintains a minimum 2.0 GPA can study CS, eliminating equity concerns about how the department would admit students in a closed-access program.
Given that UW’s CS students, on average, finish their degrees in less time than their peers on campus, and that interest in CS appears to have peaked — the number of undergrads who completed a CS degree decreased in 2023-2024 for the first time in 14 years — UW’s open-access model appears to have survived the worst.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

As Andre Acra walks past a construction site for a new luxury apartment complex on his way to class, he can’t help but feel resentment toward the plethora of upscale housing juxtaposed with the daily struggle to find an affordable meal.
Acra, a rising junior at the University of Wisconsin from Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin, is just one of the many students who are discouragingly confronted by the expensive grocery prices at UW.
“I think I bought a small container of blueberries for $6 at Capitol Centre,” Acra said. “If you really want to eat healthy and have a nutritious diet as a student, it’s really difficult and it’s really expensive, too. Everything adds up.”
Despite the flourishing and dynamic climate of Madison, students navigating the metropolitan campus often face frustration due to the lack of affordable and accessible food options. Trader Joe’s, Fresh Market and Capitol Centre Market are the closest grocery stores to campus.
But, students do not feel that these scanty options satisfy their budget or dietary needs. Fresh Market and Capitol Centre are known for being overpriced, and while Trader Joe’s offers budget-friendly prices, its location is inconvenient for most students who don’t have access to a car.
Acra is an active member of theFood Recovery Network,a student organization that tackles food waste issues and insecurity on campus by recovering leftover food from dining halls and repurposing it into warm, buffet-style meals every Tuesday and Friday.
“I became interested in the organization because I saw it as an opportunity to engage with the community,” Acra says. “I liked that it was a consistent effort to mitigate food insecurity. For instance, it wasn’t just a one-off event, like organizing a dinner once a semester or once a year. It was a chance to provide the community with regular meals twice a week.”
The FRN combats food waste by collecting items that would otherwise be discarded. While its primary food source is leftovers from the university dining halls, FRN also collects food from other community organizations such as the Pyle Center, Healthy Food For All and The People’s Farm. If there is leftover food from a meal, FRN provides plastic containers for attendees to take food home.
Most on-campus resources that provide affordable and nutritious foods to community members are organized by students like Acra. But, this student-led approach makes it challenging to expand outreach and inform people about available resources.
“I feel like you have to do your own research to find these sources,” Acra says. “I probably would have never heard of Open Seat, Food Recovery Network or similar organizations if I wasn’t interested in food justice and actively looking for this type of information, not to mention the students who may not recognize they are food insecure.”
The accessibility to affordable food, coupled with students’ desire to take matters into their own hands by forming or seeking student organizations to address issues, raises concerns about the resources available to students — especially as luxury apartment buildings continue to be approved and UWadmits more studentsthan it can accommodate.
“Entering college, I didn’t really know much about food insecurity,” Acra said. “I thought that it only affected people who were homeless or unemployed. But sometimes food insecurity can go unnoticed. Students may not know they are food insecure.”
Acra highlighted a difficult truth — college food insecurity is often hidden and goes unnoticed. For example, a student might struggle to afford a nutritious meal due to high rent costs or lack of access to a grocery store that offers healthy food options.
These situations exemplify food insecurity, a significant issue because inadequate nutrition, such as not eating enough or primarily consuming cheap, processed foods, can negatively impact students’ mental health and academic performance.
In response to the growing issue of food insecurity on campus and its alarming effects on physical and mental well-being, students have initiated a petition urging the university to create afull-time administrative position dedicated to addressing this long-standing concern.
“I think having someone dedicated to the roles we discussed — like making it easier for students to find campus food resources and helping new student organizations get started, as well as partnering with established organizations would be super helpful,” Acra says.
Alongside his involvement in the Food Recovery Network, Acra is the president of another student organization called the Mission Box, a 24/7 community pantry reliably stocked with nutritious food items. The pantry helps sustain people throughout the day until they can have a substantial meal, like the dinners provided by FRN.
“Although we’ve collaborated with the Food Recovery Network multiple times, the Mission Box provides community members with pantry items, as opposed to full meals,” Acra says. “Creating this pantry was important to me because I knew a lot of the food pantries and distribution centers in the area work on limited hours.”
Similar to the Food Recovery Network and Mission Box, several other organizations in the Madison area combat food insecurity. A few include:
For a more detailed and comprehensive list of resources, check out thisfood resource directorycreated by UW junior Chloe Shomo. This directory is designed to support food-insecure students, especially during winter break when dining halls have closed.
Excerpt (for digital version): As the new school year approaches, food insecurity looms large for many UW students. In response to this persistent concern, student-led organizations are working diligently to ensure access to nutritious and affordable food on campus.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The Wisconsin Supreme Court is currently deciding on a case that could determine the future of abortion access in Wisconsin. In fear of this case’s decision, as well as President-elect Donald Trump’s second term, Wisconsin women are starting to make proactive steps to control their reproductive health plans, according toThe Cap Times.
Amy Williamson, associate director of the University of Wisconsin Collaborative for Reproductive Equity spoke about the restrictions already in place for women seeking reproductive healthcare in Wisconsin.
“Wisconsin already has many restrictions to abortion access, including really rough ones in regards to funding restrictions,” Williamson said.
Funding assistance for abortion services in Wisconsin is not available under Medicaid, for those who are public employees or for those who obtain their health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, Williamson said.
In addition to funding restrictions, Wisconsin also requires in-person visits for those seeking abortion and some of the most strict laws about medication abortion in the country. These restrictions include a ban on telehealth, or virtual healthcare and strict requirements overseeing who exactly is allowed to provide reproductive care. For example, the same doctor has to see you at all visits, and only physicians can provide abortion related care in the state of Wisconsin, differentiating it from other states. Williamson said.
“There’s an extensive body of evidence that shows if abortion access is further restricted or eliminated in Wisconsin, things will get worse,” Williamson said. “This is not new science.”
Compared to those who are able to get abortions when they need them, people who are denied care are more likely to have chronic health and mental health struggles, to experience intimate partner violence and to struggle achieving both education and career goals, according to theANSIRH Turnaway StudyWilliamson said.
While the risk of complications from abortion related care are small, the longer you wait for treatment the more risks there are and the more expensive the treatment gets, creating a vicious cycle, Williamson said.
Williamson added that according to theCORE Brief, abortion restrictions disproportionately affect minorities, including people of color and people living on low incomes who already face inequitable access to healthcare. If Wisconsin sees additional restrictions or the elimination of abortion access, the already existing economic, health and social inequalities prevalent in the state will widen, Williamson said.
“There’s evidence and lots of research that shows abortion bans and restrictions harm everyone who may become pregnant, but they cause greater harm to people who are already systematically denied access to care and economic opportunity,” Williamson said.
After the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization’s decision in June 2022, abortion was unavailable in Wisconsin for 15 months due to the 1849 law interpreted by many to criminalize abortion care, Williamson said. While services have been returned, this law is still being debated in the Wisconsin Supreme Court.
During the 15 months that Wisconsin went without abortion access, doctors were prevented from providing standard care to patients experiencing pregnancy complications according to CORE research, Williamson said.
There is growing evidence that shows a connection between states with abortion restrictions or bans and states with a lack of access to obstetricians, gynecologists and other physicians, Williamson said.
“New OBGYNs or medical students don’t want to be trained or provide care here because it’s a hard environment to provide care,” Williamson said. “That’s particularly bad for Wisconsin because we have maternity care deserts in the state where we don’t have enough doctors as it is.”
After the Dobbs decision in Wisconsin, there are documented decreases in access to contraceptive care and increases in difficulty accessing care, according to aGuttmacher study.
Additionally, there is research evidence from other states documenting increases in people using long acting methods of contraception and birth control including IUDs and implants as well as permanent methods like vasectomies and tubal ligations, according to numerous studies including aScience Direct studyabout Ohio, aJAMA network OBGYN studyand anASRM Fertility and Sterility study,
“If you create more barriers for abortion, it has ripple effects on other types of reproductive care,” Williamson said.
During the 15 months of no abortion in Wisconsin, people seeking reproductive healthcare travelled to Illinois and Minnesota, which is something Williamson expects to happen again if access is eliminated, she said.
Additionally, there is emerging evidence according to the CORE brief that Wisconsinites have been seeking telehealth medication abortions from providers in other states, referred to as shield law providers, Williamson said.
Shield laws offer legal protections to doctors or other healthcare providers who offer abortion care by telehealth to patients in states with restricted reproductive access, Williamson said.
“We have quite recent data that suggests hundreds, if not thousands of Wisconsinites have obtained medication abortion pills from this telehealth service from out of state shield law providers,” Williamson said.
Director of Communications for Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin Analiese Eicher said that there is rampant misinformation surrounding the conversation of reproductive health.
A common tactic employed by those who oppose reproductive healthcare and the right to bodily autonomy is to cause confusion, Eicher said.
“The confusion that we hear and the questions that we get from folks is part of their plan,” Eicher said. “It’s part of the strategy.”
Since the Dobbs decision, there has been an increase in questions regarding access to birth control, reproductive and sexual care, but Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin is prepared for this increase and is providing care through the confusion, Eicher said.
Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin has a program called the Quarterly Contraceptive Kit that ships birth control directly to you to be set up virtually, Eicher said.
“The request for contraceptives and birth control, particularly the long acting birth control like an IUD or the Depo shot, have increased and questions about those have increased.”
Since Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin’s beginning 90 years ago, they have been providing care across Wisconsin throughout decades of changes and varying restrictions, Eicher said.
Eicher assured that Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin has every intention of continuing to provide reproductive care regardless of the Wisconsin Supreme Court decision.
“We are prepared for everything,” Eicher said. “But I think the biggest thing that we’re prepared for is that we’re providing care no matter what. And we mean that.”
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

Wisconsin’s bats are seeing a slight resurgence after White-Nose Syndrome depleted populations across the country. The Wisconsin DNRfoundthat bat populations in caves had begun to increase after being devastated when WNScame to Wisconsin in 2014.
WNSis caused by the fungus, “Psuedogymnoascus destuctans,” that infects the bats’ wings and noses, giving it its name. It wasoriginally discoveredin the U.S. in 2006 among bats in a cave outside Albany, New York. It has nowspreadthroughout the U.S. and Canada, reaching 45 of the 48 contiguous states and 10 of 13 Canadian provinces and territories.
Professor of Forest and Wildlife Ecology in the College of Agricultural and Life Sciences, Anna Pidgeon, said the fungus was likely spread from cave explorers in Europe who brought it to the United States.
“The fungus exists in Eurasia, but the bats in Eurasia do not react to [the fungus] in the way that bats in North America do,” Pidgeon said. “The suspicion is that people who explore caves, spelunkers, in Europe brought it over on their equipment or shoes to North America.”
Pidgeon said the reason for the fast spread is because bats live in multiple caves during their lives and hibernate very close to each other and the fungus spreads between them.
WNS affects bats that hibernate during the winter, Pidgeon said.In Wisconsin, that means the tricolored bat, northern long-eared bat, big brown bat and little brown bat.
Migratory bats are not known to beaffectedby the fungus. These bats often roost in trees and spaced apart from each other, limiting the chance for spread.
Professor and Extension Wildlife Specialist in CALS, David Drake, said the main danger WNS poses to bats is waking them from their hibernation.
“Bats are true hibernators, so they’re into a deep torpor,” Drake said. “When they wake up it costs them a lot of energy for them to go from torpor to an active level.”
This waking uses up the energy reserves stored in fat that the bats pack on during the summer and fall before hibernating for the winter. After they wake up, the bats are often disoriented, Drake said. If the bats leave the cave, they move from the controlled climate of the cave and into the cold of winter. The fungus ends up killing them through exhaustion, hypothermia from leaving the cave or dehydration.
The Center for Biological Diversity saysdamage to bats’ wing tissuecan cause bats to wake but it is not known exactly what causes this.
Pidgeon said cave conditions actually favor the fungus’s growth, preferring colder temperatures, which makes things even worse for cave-hibernating bats.
“50 degrees and slightly humid environment of the cave is exactly the conditions that the fungus likes,” Pidgeon said.
Researchers from the U.S. Geological Survey’s National Wildlife Health Center partnered with the Wisconsin DNR to field test aWNS vaccine. The study lasted from 2019 to 2022 and showed that vaccinated bats had lower fungal loads than bats given a placebo.
Researchers additionally observed that both vaccinated and unvaccinated bats seemed to improve, both with lower loads of the fungus and emerging later from their winter Wisconsin caves. The observation has borne out in other bat populations in the eastern U.S. that were affected by WNS earlier in its spread.
Drake said there are concerns about trying to kill fungus in caves preemptively because of the fragility of the cave ecosystem.
“Cave ecosystems are so fragile, that if you start pulling on this thread, what else are you going to unravel that may create bigger problems in the cave system,” Drake said.
But, the populations of western bats could still be affected as the fungus moves west and unexposed bats have to grapple with it. Californiadetectedthe WNS in four new counties in the past year.
WNS is a danger not only to bats, but also to ecological balance. Killing large numbers of bats has a long-term effect due to bats’ slow-reproducing nature. Pidgeon said this event threatens the long term stability of bat populations.
“Bats have one or two pups at a time, but it depends on species, so mostly one,” Pidgeon said. “It can take decades and decades to rebuild the population, if that’s even possible.”
Bats play key ecological roles, from eating insects to pollination. Astudypublished in Science found that counties that had bat die-offs had an increase in insecticide use by farmers. This increased insecticide use was then linked to an 8% increase in infant mortality.
The increase in populations may be a hopeful sign for Wisconsin’s bats because it may signal a true change in the bats’ fight against WNS. There is new hope for North America’s bats, but the fight to protect them will continue.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The Dane County Board approved a bioremediation pilot project Nov. 13, a $1.5 millioncontractwith the Dane County Regional Airport that has begun to clean up PFAS or per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, according toThe Cap Times.
PFAS are used in firefighting foam to tackle fires or airplane crashes, but the chemicals have also been shown to cause environmental issues, Dane County Board Supervisor for District 6 and Environment, Agriculture and Natural Resources Committee Chair Yogesh Chawla said.
“What we’ve learned is that PFAS chemicals are hazardous at parts per trillion, and the EPA recently declared that PFAS chemicals are unsafe at any level,” Chawla said.
Studies have revealed associations between exposure to PFAS with a variety of health effects including altered immune and thyroid function, liver disease, kidney disease, negative reproductive and developmental effects and cancer, according to theNational Institutes of Health.
PFAS levels are highly elevated in certain Madison waterways, likeStarkweather Creek, Chawla said.
“If you take Lake Monona and put an eyedropper full of PFAS chemicals in there, it could potentially pollute that entire lake,” Chawla said.
PFAS chemicals were created on-site at the Dane County Regional Airport from firefighting operations conducted there with the Air National Guard Base, Chawla said.
A 2018investigationfrom MINDS@UW, detected PFAS contamination in soils and groundwater under airport property, Dane County Regional Airport Director of Marketing and Communications Michael Riechers said.
“The airport continues to prioritize remediation at identified contamination sites,” Riechers said. “We are working in close partnership with the Air National Guard as they progress through their investigation process.”
Environmental remediation is the process of removing pollutants and contaminants from water and soil, according to theU.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
When it comes to getting rid of PFAS chemicals, remediation techniques are the best option, Chawla said.
PFAS chemicals are difficult to clean up because the chemical bonds for PFAS chemicals are so tight that it’s really hard to break through, giving PFAS chemicals its nickname “forever chemicals,” Chawla said. The pilot project will use certain chemicals to help break down PFAS as much as possible, Chawla said.
“It’s a very serious concern, and unfortunately, there really is no proven technology to fully get rid of PFAS,” Chawla said.
The pilot project has already reduced concentrations of PFAS in contaminated airport grounds with anaverage of 97%decrease at one of the testing sites, Riechers said.
The Dane County Regional Airport is working in close partnership with the Air National Guard as the National Air Force progresses through their own investigation process at the Dane County airport. The investigation includes identifying additional areas of concern and developing recommendations for further action, Riechers said.
The Wisconsin National Guard is federally mandated to follow theComprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Acteight-step process to address PFAS concerns at its facilities, Wisconsin National Guard Deputy Director of Public Affairs Paul Gorman said.
“The Wisconsin National Guard has and will continue to follow all federal and state laws related to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances,” Gorman said.
Truax Field, an Air National Guard base in Dane County, is currently in step three of the CERCLA process — the remedial investigation — after receiving authorization and funding from the National Guard Bureau, Gorman said.
The process involves an evaluation of contamination at a site and then evaluates potential threats to human health and the environment, Gorman said.
“Truax Field has made significant strides to ensure that future environmental risk is minimized, while working with the Federal Aviation Administration firefighting response requirement,” Gorman said.
The U.S. Department of Defense has been required to transition away from using firefighting foam that contains PFAS. But, this kind of foam has been considered the most effective product for suppressing jet fuel fires, so it has been a slow process for firefighting departments to completely stop using PFAS foam, according to astudyfrom the Journal of Environmental Research.
In March 2023, Truax Field was the first U.S. Air Force installation to remove all foam fire suppression systems in all facilities, Gorman said.
Regarding the reliability of Dane County Regional Airport’s pilot project, the Wisconsin Department of National Resources thoroughly reviewed and monitored the plan and has been supportive throughout the process, Riechers said.
The airport is committed to reducing their contribution to climate change, improving air and water quality, reducing the impact of noise, and improving and preserving natural resources, Riechers said.
There have been continued concerns of the reliability of this clean-up process, and the airport directs those to adocumentcreated by the airport last year, which was made to be presented at a meeting between the Airport Commission and the Environment, Agriculture and Natural Resources Committee, Riechers said.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

Members of the Madison Police Department Central Community Policing Teamshut downa bar near the 500 block of State Street on Dec. 7 after conducting a routine bar check in the area shortly before 10 p.m.
MPD shut down the bar for the rest of the night after finding no licensed bartender on duty and that around 28% of customers were underage, according to MPD’s incident report.
Officers gave most underage customers citations, and one underage woman was taken to Dane County Jail, according to the incident report.
MPD typically issues underage drinkers a citation, but if they refuse to cooperate with an officer they could face more citations or other charges, according to the incident report.
MPD did not disclose the name of the bar.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The Madison City Council will vote today to censure District 18 Alder Charles Myadze. A majority of the City Council agreed to censure Myadze following the release of a report on theCity of Madison’s investigationinto at least three sexual harassment and domestic violence complaints.
As a result of the investigation, Myadze has already been removed from five committees, including the Alcohol License Review Committee, Board of Park Commissioners, Greater Madison MPO, Sister City Collaboration Committee and Water Utility Board following a Dec. 4recommendationfrom Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway.
If the resolution is passed, Myadze will not be removed from the council. Instead,it is a symbolic messagethat most of the city council disapproves of Myadze’s conduct.
The City received at least three formal complaints from one Madison city employee, one elected official and one person not employed by the City of Madison prompting an official investigation into Myadze’s conduct.
District 2 Alder Juliana Bennett, one of the three parties in the case against Myadze,released an official statementNov. 14 claiming sexual harassment and domestic violence against Myadze.
“In March 2022, during the National League of Cities (NLC) conference in Washington DC, Ald. Myadze made a series of unwelcome, sexually inappropriate comments towards me,” Bennett wrote in the statement. “Over the course of the conference, his comments escalated. He suggest[ed], incorrectly, that I was having sexual relations with [a] former alder, who, like Ald. Myadze, is twice my age.”
Myadze continued to make comments about her physical appearance during the conference, Bennett said.
While Bennett continued to receive threats from Myadze after returning from Washington D.C., she decided to keep quiet about the situation because she believed Myadze was prioritizing his personal interests over the prosperity and well-being of Madison, according to the statement.
After hearing about similar accounts and allegations of sexual harassment and domestic violence—including Myadze’s former domestic partners and son—Bennett filed a formal complaint with the City of Madison prompting an investigation into the allegations.
Investigators originally sustained Bennett’s claims but later reversed this decision, claiming Myadze remained professional despite his threats, according to Bennett’s statement.
“It is a shame that my ability to handle a tense situation with professionalism is what ended up being used against me,” Bennett said in her statement.
Following a formal investigation, the investigation did not sustain two of the three complaints that Myadze violatedAPM 3-5, which prohibits sexual harassment and actions that create a hostile work environment. Further, the investigation did not sustain any claims that Myadze’s actions violated state and federal law.
Ensuing this decision, members of the council—including Rhodes-Conway—introduced a resolution to censure Myadze during a virtual council meeting Nov. 26. District 8 Alder MGR Govindarajan later published the introduction of the resolutionvia X.
“The patterns of unethical behavior we’ve seen are unbecoming of an alder, and Myadze should resign immediately,” MGR said in the post on X.
Once the censure resolution was introduced by the city council, Myadzesubmitted a statementdefending his position in the situation.
“I take my role as Alder seriously,” Myadze said in the statement. “Since these allegations came out, I have attended meetings virtually when possible and have taken care not to make anyone feel uncomfortable by my mere presence as this matter is ongoing.”
Myadze said he is committed to the city and opposed the censure resolution.
“I find this whole censure process disruptive to the collaborative and respectful environment necessary for the work of the people,” Myadze said in the statement.
With the statement, Myadze also submitted 62 pages oftext messagesbetween Bennett and himself with the goal of maintaining transparency, he said.
The Madison City Council will vote on the resolution during tonight’s meeting and must receive at least 11 votes to pass, regardless of number of members present.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

CONTENT WARNING: Discussion of suicide and/or self-harm. If you are experiencing thoughts of suicide or self-harm, dial 988 to reach the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. View options for mental health services on campus throughUniversity Health Services.
Seasonal affective disorder is a type of depression triggered by a recurrent seasonal pattern, with symptoms lasting about 4-5 months out of the year, according to theNational Institute of Mental Health. The NIMH estimates that millions of Americans experience symptoms of SAD, but many do not know they have the disorder.
Symptoms of depression can include feelings of sadness or hopelessness, anger, loss of interest in activities, sleep disturbances and tiredness, anxiety and suicidal thoughts, according toMayo Clinic. For SAD specifically, additional symptoms can include oversleeping, overeating and social withdrawal, according to the NIMH.
SAD can significantly impact college students and interfere with their ability to attend classes, complete assignments, regulate their sleep schedules and maintain social connections, according to an email from the University of Wisconsin University Health Services Interim Director of Mental Health Services Ellen Marks.
“During the colder months, UHS typically sees an increase in mental health concerns due to seasonal stressors, academic pressures, and the shorter days that can worsen conditions like SAD,” Marks said in the email.
Psychologist emeritus and former UHS Mind-Body Wellness Coordinator Robert McGrath said finals are likely the most stressful period of the school year.
Losing sunlight from daylight savings, which takes place close to finals season, can also heighten the effects of SAD, McGrath said.
“The days are short and at the same time it’s during final season, then you add on the pressure of academic success, and if you’re a little low on energy — well, it’s just a double punch, right?” McGrath said.
UW Center for Healthy Minds scientist Cortland Dahl led the creation of the Healthy Minds Program App, an app that leads users through a series of mindfulness and meditation practices, according toHealthy Minds Innovations.
In a 2022 Healthy Mindssurvey, 43% of students screened positive for significant symptoms of anxiety, depression or both.
“It’s really an epidemic — a mental health and emotional health epidemic — that we are in the middle of,” Dahl said.
Studiesshow mental health has been steadily deteriorating for many years, an issue that has been exacerbated by the increased use of smartphones and social media, Dahl said.
Factors that support mental and emotional health include real-life social connections, sleep habits and time to decompress without distractions — all things that are undermined by the culture of digital devices and social media, Dahl said.
McGrath is involved in the positive psychology movement, which he describes as focusing on making people happier by increasing positive experiences, rather than only focusing on treating mental health problems as they arise.
Healthy relationships and altruism are two of the most important factors for happiness, McGrath said. He mentioned theHarvard Study of Adult Development, which found that happiness in relationships has a powerful influence on health and well-being. McGrath recommends studying in groups during finals season, to avoid feelings of loneliness and overwhelm.
McGrath also encourages students to take study breaks by moving around and getting outside. Sitting for up to 45 minutes is okay, but sitting for over an hour is not good for the body or the brain, McGrath said.
Nature-deficit disorder is a likely contributor to SAD for many people, McGrath said. NDD refers to the idea that because humans are spending less time outdoors than in the past , McGrath said. For exampe, the increased use of technology and social media is commonly thought to decrease time spent outside and increase mental and physical issues, according toHealthPartners.
McGrath said that in cold places like Wisconsin, where people are already less motivated to go outside, SAD can further reduce that motivation, depriving them of the mental and physical benefits of being outdoors.
Times of stress are the most important times for practicing mindfulness and meditation, especially when someone feels overwhelmed and like they have a lack of time, both McGrath and Dahl said. Dahl said it might seem ironic to make time in a busy day to essentially do nothing or meditate but said meditations’ benefits are invaluable for physical, mental and emotional health.
“One of the challenges for students is saying ‘I don’t have time right for meditation,’ and there’s a good meditation guideline that if you don’t have time for 15 minutes of meditation, you need to do 30,” McGrath said.
Dahl acknowledged that self-help can seem overwhelming and recommended starting with simple practices like a mindful body scan to bring awareness to any stress or tension in the body.
Dahl also recommends working to cultivate the ability to recognize one’s own mental and emotional state, which he said can be done anytime and anywhere.
“You don’t even have to stop what you’re doing, but intentionally bring awareness to your own mental and emotional state,” Dahl said. “‘What thoughts are moving through my mind right now? What’s going on in my body?’”
Dahl and McGrath emphasized the benefits of gratitude and thankfulness for mental health. McGrath described practicing gratitude as an antidepressant, and recommended a gratitude journal as a way to improve mood and energy, which in turn can positively affect academic performance.
Dahl referencedresearchshowing that, especially in the world of education, reframing learning as part of something to be grateful for and something that can contribute to the greater good, can be incredibly powerful for well being and mental health.
“That little shift to it [reframing] just takes out the kind of mental tightness and all the expectations and pressure we put upon ourselves, and science shows that can be really powerful in supporting our mental health and our performance,” Dahl said.
Students don’t need another item on their to-do list, but mindfulness can easily be incorporated into every activity they’re already doing, Dahl said. Dah’s journey with meditation and mindfulness began when he was a college student and needed a way to manage his stress, and after he started practicing meditation regularly, it changed his life, he said.
The brain and nervous system are built for learning and transformation, and intentionally using that biological capacity to support the flourishing of one’s mind and body is incredibly powerful, Dahl said.
“We’re kind of built for this [evolving to flourish],” Dahl said. “We just need to use it with some intention.”
For students experiencing SAD, UHS recommendsindividual therapythrough UHS orUwilland light therapy usingHappy Lightsavailable at Madison public libraries. McGrath also recommendedlight boxesfor helping to treat SAD.
Resources regarding mental health:
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The nineteen pro-Palestine protestors arrested at the Dec. 5 Universities of Wisconsin Board of Regents protest will receive citations, according to a report from theUW-Madison Police Department. The citations will be given for violating aWisconsin state lawthat prevents intentional creation of a volume of noise that unreasonably interferes with a university-sponsored or university-authorized activity.
One individual received an additional citation for violating anotherlawpreventing the depositing of human waste products in an area not intended for that purpose, as they intentionally spit on food inside the meeting room, according to the report.
Eight of the 19 people arrested and released were affiliated with the University of Wisconsin, two were UW-Madison alumni and, five were affiliated with UW-Milwaukee and five had no UW affiliation, according to the report.
Students for Justice in Palestine and the Young Democratic Socialists of America at UW-Madison received letters of investigation following the disruptive conduct in violation of campus policies the day of the protest, UW spokesperson John Lucas said in an email statement to The Badger Herald.
“UW-Madison supports the right to free expression, within the bounds of the law and campus policy,” Lucas said in the statement.
SJP is on disciplinary probation through the 2024-25 academic year, and a substantiated violation of probation requirements could lead to eventual termination of the group’s Registered Student Organization status, Lucas said. When on probation, an RSO is required to comply with theOrganizational Rules of Conductin order to access RSO privileges and benefits, such as reserving university facilities.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The Madison Police Department responded to a possible shooting at Abundant Life Christian School, according to astatementfrom Madison Police Chief Shon Barnes.Barnes said there were at least seven injuries and three deaths, including one juvenile, as a result of the shooting. The shooter, one of the dead, was a 17-year-old female student at the school,according to AP news.
Abundant Life Christian School teaches K-12 and is around four miles from the University of Wisconsin campus near Lake Monona.
“This is something we prepared for but hoped that we would never have to do,” Barnes said.
Residents claimed they heard gunshots in the area of the school.Officers discovered multiple injured victims after responding to an active shooter call at the school at 10:57 a.m.
At least seven people were transported to area hospitals for treatment after officers administered lifesaving efforts to anyone they found wounded.
No officers fired their weapons in response to the shooting, Barnes said.
This shooting comes just two days after the 12th anniversary of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. Today’s shooting follows a previous Dane County shooting that happened in May of this last year at Mount Horeb Middle School.
Wisconsin’s gun laws are ranked #21 in the country for gun law strength, and their gun violence rate of 14 is slightly below the national average of 14.2, according toEverytown.
Wisconsin has failed to pass laws requiring background checks for all gun sales and has not enacted or repealed major gun safety policies in recent years, according toEverytown.
Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., and Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Wis., have releasedstatementsregardingthe shooting.President Joe Biden has also been briefed on the school shooting, a White House spokespersonsaid.
UW released a statement on the shooting at around 1 p.m. and pointed students and staff to campus counseling resources.
This is a developing story. Further updates on this story can be foundhere.
The following information is reported from a 2:30 p.m. press conference at Madison Firehouse 14 in which Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway and Barnes addressed reporters.
The shooter was a teenage student who attended the school. MPD will not be releasing the age, gender or any other identifying remarks of the shooter, according to Barnes.
Other than the shooter, 2 people have died. One was a teacher and the other a teenage student. Of the six students who were injured, two are now in critical condition in the hospital with life-threatening injuries. The four others are at other area hospitals with non-life-threatening injuries.
MPD Chief Barnes said the shooter used a handgun and the shooting was confined to one space. The shooter’s family has been compliant with the ongoing investigation and their home is being searched by the Madison Police Department, according to Chief Barnes.
“I am on record saying that I think we need to do better in our country and our community to prevent gun violence,” Madison Mayor Satya Rhodes-Conway said. “I hoped that this day would never come in Madison. It is not something that any mayor, any fire chief, any police chief, any person in public office ever wants to have to deal with. I will ask our entire community and our entire country to do whatever we can to make sure that no public official ever has to stand in this position again.”
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

District 18 Alder Charles Myadze wasarrested Thursdayfollowing multiple accusations of domestic abuse. Myadze’s arrest followed the passing of a resolution by Madison City Council members Tuesday to censure the alder.
Myazde was booked into Dane County Jail on counts of strangulation, false imprisonment, battery, burglary and burglary causing battery on a person, according to a Madison Police Departmentincident report. He was taken into custody without incident Thursday afternoon.
The City of Madisonpreviously published an official investigation reportdetailing sexual harassment and domestic abuse accusations from at least three women, including District 2 Alder Juliana Bennett.
Bennettreleased a statementNov. 14 discussing her encounters with Myadze, including sexually inappropriate comments. After continuing to face harassment from Myadze, Bennett filed an official complaint with the City of Madison, according to the statement.
City of Madison investigators, however, did not sustain the accusations against Myadze for violatingAPM 3-5—policy prohibiting sexual harassment or actions that create a hostile work environment—or state and federal laws.
Following this decision, Madison City Council Members introduced a resolution in November tocensureMyadze, which would symbolize a majority disapproval of Myadze’s conduct.
Myadze has faced similar allegations of sexual harassment and domestic violence from former domestic partners and his son, which contributed to Bennett’s decision to file her complaint with the City of Madison.
As of now, Myadze’s charges are tentative pending his court hearing tomorrow.
Editor’s Note: This story has been updated with additional information about Myadze’s arrest.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

The humanities have served as the cornerstone of higher education since their very inception. According to the National Humanities Center, this academic discipline includes the study of history, philosophy, religion, languages, literature, fine and performing arts, media and culture and much more.
“Put simply, the humanities help us understand and interpret the human experience, as individuals and societies,” the NHC website states.
But, the humanities differ from other majors in a key area — their survival.
“But humanities fields are under threat,” NHC States. What does this mean? Is this phenomenon happening at the University of Wisconsin or is it an exception to this danger?
The issue
According to the NHC, funding for humanities programs has been cut across the country and are taught by underpaid, often temporary faculty.
Less than 10% of college graduates earned humanities degrees in 2020, a 25% drop from 2012, according to theAmerican Academy of Arts and Sciences. A 2013 article from The Hechinger Report highlighted that public universities in particular are subject to attacks against less “strategic” majors found in the humanities.
These trends have continued and are not limited to public universities. According to anarticleby Inside Higher Ed, Boston University paused graduate admissions in a dozen humanities and social sciences programs, apparently due to a lack of funding available for such departments.
According to theNational Endowment for the Humanities, appropriations to pursue research in humanities fields have largely declined since its peak in 1979 when adjusting for inflation. Moreover, though funding has remained relatively stagnant over the past decade, it has not substantially increased during this time.
To explore the roots of these problems, it is important to explore an essential quality of the humanities — literacy and how one can be educated in it.
Literacy education and the humanities
Professor Kate Vieira, of the UW School of Education, shared her perspective on the relationship between literacy and interest in the humanities. According to Vieira, language departments have faced demands to increase class sizes or even complete shutdowns.
Vieira said many of the challenges posed to the humanities can be linked to their ability to challenge existing conditions of society.
“I think a lot of the pressure that the humanities are facing is not because of anything wrong with the humanities, but because it threatens the status quo,” Vieira said.
Vieira further shared that increased control over education in schools can narrow approaches to inherently flexible subjects like reading and writing. Those who receive a more open education in literacy and the humanities can perform more effectively regardless of occupation, Vieira said.
Vieira, whose research concerns practical applications of writing, said language can support hatred but also peace and justice. Writing can also help people process their own experiences, especially when taught to children, according to Vieira.
“The voice of sense within yourself and also communicating with others has been really powerful,” Vieira said.
Vieira said poetry written by children who had access to humanist education is often used to encourage peace in nations such as Colombia.
Professors weigh in: The History Department
The chair of UW’s Department of History, Neil Kodesh, spoke about historians’ struggles and successes in recent years.
Kodesh said the difficulties faced by humanities departments include political challenges, management of resources within institutions of higher education and students’ waning interest in the fields. Kodesh said the latter two were greatly influenced by the 2008 recession, which stirred greater interest in fields of higher income.
“It’s in this context that there is a lot more attention placed on… the point of taking [a humanities] class, [and] what kind of job you’ll get in a major in history, English or philosophy,” Kodesh said.
According to Kodesh, history departments at other universities have been consolidated with other departments or even abandoned entirely. But, Kodesh said UW’s humanities departments have remained relatively healthy despite the losses at other universities.
Kodesh said foreign language departments in particular have faced large funding cuts and challenges from education officials and politicians. Other humanities departments have experienced comparable degrees of difficulty in recent years, according to Kodesh.
Regarding enrollment in the history department, Kodesh said there was a large downturn in 2008, linked to the recession, but the number of history majors and certificate students has since reached a similar level. UW’s administration has also been generally supportive of the history department and allowed more faculty to be hired, according to Kodesh.
“I’d say the college as a whole has always been very supportive of the history department and [the department] has taken a lot of measures to support [itself],” Kodesh said.
Some of these measures include hiring younger faculty, incorporating the history of science department into the history department, updating the history department’s website with syllabus information and especially the creation of the history certificate, Kodesh said.
According to Kodesh, the certificate allows students from an array of disciplines to support their majors with the skills and knowledge gained from history courses.
“The skills you will develop in these classes will translate outside the classroom regardless of what kind of profession you pursue in the future,” Kodesh said.
Professors weigh in: The Religious Studies Department
The director of UW’s Religious Studies Program Susan B. Ridgely, spoke about her department’s challenges in the modern era. Similarly to Kodesh, Ridgely said the decline of interest in the humanities is linked to the 2008 recession as students began pursuing majors with clear career outcomes.
“A hurdle that we’ve had to think through [is how] more students are gravitating toward more clearly defined majors that lead to more clearly defined careers,” Ridgely said.
Ridgely said humanities departments generally face difficulties at a similar rate, though departments with substantial support before 2008, such as English or History departments, have been able to mitigate their losses more effectively than smaller programs.
According to Ridgely, an increasing rate of secularism in the US population may have influenced enrollment in Religious Studies programs, but many religious scholars are nonetheless personally secular.
Ridgely said interest in the Religious Studies program peaked around 2001 after the September 11th attacks. According to Ridgely, enrollment has increased over the past few years.
“We’ve done a good job connecting Religious Studies with thinking about how to live in a diverse society and how to engage with people in a meaningful way across difference,” Ridgely said.
According to Ridgely, the Religious Studies Department is recruiting new professors and looking forward to a new humanities building where the department can increase its on-campus presence. Ridgely said the flexibility of UW’s curriculum to accommodate double majors and certificates has also benefited the program.
Professors Weigh in: The Gender & Women’s Studies Department
Professor Judith Houck, chair of the Department of Gender and Women’s Studies, tied declining enrollment in the humanities over the past 10 to 15 years to an increased focus on income outcomes when students decide whether to study at college.
At UW, humanities departments have managed to rebound, according to Houck. Houck, who is also a professor in the History Department, said Gender and Women’s Studies usually see full enrollment in its courses, an indication fields in the humanities remain relevant in the modern day.
“Humanities are about exploring the human experience and certainly have not stopped being necessary and important work,” Houck said.
According to Houck, the Gender and Women’s Studies department was recently given permission by UW administration to launch a PhD program. Houck said growth can be attributed to strong faculty, the relevance of the courses taught and gender and women’s studies classes’ intersection with other majors.
Despite this success in Madison, other University of Wisconsin system schools have cut humanities programs such as gender & women’s studies and there continues to be opposition to the field based on political grounds, Houck said.
“There are places where Gender & Women’s Studies is seen as a more political than intellectual or academic project and in those states Gender & Women’s Studies is being targeted,” Houck said.
Professors Weigh in: Philosophy and Creative Writing
The Badger Herald also briefly spoke to Professor Emily Fletcher, the chair of UW’s Department of Philosophy and Professor Amy Quan Barry of the English, specifically creative writing, department.
According to Fletcher, the Department of Philosophy is developing a new artificial intelligence and data ethics certificate and is hiring up to six new faculty members this year.
“We are growing in many respects,” Fletcher said.
Barry said both the English department and UW have supported the creative writing program in recent years. Seven creative writing professors have been hired since 2019, many of them junior faculty, according to Barry.
“We’re fortunate that we’ve been able to rebuild our program after losing several faculty members to retirement and relocation,” Barry said.
Student voices
UW Senior Kalin Ahmad, a double major in physics and philosophy, shared his thoughts about the current state of the humanities here at Madison. Kalin said while he knows many philosophy majors and has not seen significant changes during his time at UW, other students have expressed concerns about the humanities.
Some complaints include therelativelylow pay as well as weaker career outcomes for students in the humanities, Ahmad said.Discussing which current practices in the humanities should be continued, Ahmad emphasized the importance of small class sizes for lectures and discussions.
“I’ve noticed philosophy discussions are way more interesting than any other discussion that I’ve had for any other class, [which is] a factor of material [and] structure,” Ahmad said.
Ahmad said homework for humanities classes, which usually includes reading analysis, while mandatory, is less stressful and more refreshing than work in other fields.
The requirement for all UW students to take courses in the humanities is also effective, Ahmad said. According to Ahmad, these requirements can help expose students to interesting fields they may not have considered prior.
“I need[ed] to take humanities classes… [which were] actually really interesting… I was able to essentially just say ‘what if’ I double major in [philosophy] and take extra classes in that?’ Ahmad said regarding his choice to study philosophy.
In addition, multiple organizations on campus support the humanities. According to the Fall 2024Student Organization Fair‘s directory, there are 39 student organizations considered “arts and music,” alongside numerous others dedicated to fields of the humanities such as English or foreign languages.
What can students and faculty do?
Even if UW’s humanities departments have fared well compared to many others across the nation, students and professors can still advocate for its continued support on and off campus.
Academics in the humanities, especially younger ones, have turned toward community-based work to raise awareness and show the practical implications of their work, Professor Kodesh said. According to Kodesh, sharing one’s research in the humanities with a broader audience can cross the gap between academia and society.
“One of our [goals] is to go out and… be part of those multi-disciplinary conversations taking place about how to tackle pressing problems in the world today,” Kodesh said.
Professor Houck also said one of the aims of professors in the humanities is to present their findings to a larger audience to be seen as less insular.
One way students can encourage continued interest in the humanities is by taking courses or certificates that fit non-humanities fields, such as students interested in medicine who enroll in the health and humanities certificate, Houck said.
Professor Ridgely said the narrative of the “death of the humanities” is both inaccurate and can diminish confidence in students potentially interested in the humanities. Instead, students and faculty can gain support for the humanities by conveying its strengths, according to Ridgely.
“Emphasizing what’s actually happening in terms of the work that’s being done, the thinking that’s being done, …the creative kinds of classes that are being taught, …can really help,” Ridgely said.
The essence of the humanities
The ultimate purpose of the humanities, just like the subjects contained within its sphere, is abstract and difficult to define.
Professor Kodesh said while studying the humanities may appear like a privilege at first due to the lack of focus on career outcomes, courses across humanities fields universally apply to the workforce.
Anyone can study History and English, but studying these subjects in a college setting is a unique experience, according to Kodesh.
“[The humanities] help you think more critically about who you are and what you’re doing in the world,” Kodesh said.
Similarly, Professor Ridgely said the benefits of humanities classes — such as stronger reading and writing abilities — are essential regardless of one’s occupation. The humanities also encourage creativity, which is heavily desired in most industries, Ridgely said.
Ahmad said UW’s flexible curriculum allows students to first take courses in humanities fields and then connect said fields to their other interests. According to Ahmad, many of his peers take STEM courses such as genetics or physics alongside classes in the humanities.
“It is worth taking [humanities] classes [of interest] just because you will learn something that you enjoy,” Ahmad said.
While being able to earn a double major in a humanities field makes the area more appealing, it is not necessary to still take a course and derive meaning from it, Ahmad said.
Professor Houck said the humanities provide valuable instruction in the human condition across different societies, connecting different fields together and inspiring interest in areas students may not have previously enjoyed by relating to one of their other interests.
“Even if you don’t think the humanities or reading novels or thinking about the past might be your cup of tea, college is a great time to explore things outside of your comfort zone,” Houck said.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

Tell us about yourself. Where are you from? What year are you in school and what is your major?
My name is Anna Staresinic. I am doing information science and data science as a double major, and then I have certificates in computer science and sustainability, and I’m from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
What is WASB?
WASB stands for the Wisconsin Alumni Student Board. We are an extension of the Alumni Association and we’re also a Registered Student Organization.  Our goal is to get people connected with the university and excited about being at this school. We have programming that we do each semester, a bunch of different events to engage students with alumni, engage students in professional development events, in community engagement events and that sort of thing. For example, we recently hosted an event where students could learn how to become financially independent and hear from a professional at UW Credit Union about how to manage their finances on their own. We also just did an event where students could attend a free dinner with an alumni or a professor to learn about whatever field they study in, or gain some sort of life advice. So we do a wide range of many different things, and we’re also just a really close-knit and fun community on campus that is a lot of fun to be a part of and the program is a lot of fun to put together.
How did you get involved with WASB?
I applied at the beginning of my freshman year. So I had seen WASB on social media and stuff like that before even coming to this school. And I thought that just everyone in it looked super cool and it looked like something I wanted to be part of. So I applied my first semester and didn’t get in and then I applied again my second semester and got in then, and I’ve been a part of it ever since.
What inspired you to take on the role as president?
The people that I’ve met through the organization have just really changed my life for the better. It’s a really eclectic and passionate group of people, and I’ve met some of my closest friends at this school through WASB. So many of the people that I live with now are in WASB. It’s just a really incredible community, and I think that really drives my excitement and my passion for everything that I’m a part of — when the people that you’re around are constantly challenging you, but also supporting you in everything that you do. So getting to work with all these incredible people and get people excited about being at this school and being involved in what this university does I think really motivated me to want to be president and help lead that vision for the organization and the events that we put on to get students excited about being here.
What is your favorite thing about WASB?
I  love all of our events where we get to engage with people and make people’s day. I feel like I’ve seen some of the stuff that we do really puts smiles on people’s faces, or gets people engaged in really interesting conversations and creates new connections. I love getting to be a part of that and getting to see the way that I’ve made my own impact on our events that we have and just on the organization. That has been really fulfilling. I’ve gotten to do a lot of different things that I never really thought I’d have an opportunity to do while in college, or that I never really imagined myself doing. And also, like I’ve been saying, the people are just so incredible and so wonderful, and I love getting to go to meetings where I’m hanging out with a bunch of my friends and being on leadership with a bunch of my friends. So that I feel has made it really special for me as well.
What is the best memory you have from WASB?
My favorite memory has to be from our 2023 All-Campus Party, a week-long celebration where we hosted several fun and free events for students during my second semester on WASB. One of our events for that every year is Breakfast with Bucky where we get to hand out free breakfast to students all morning. We started preparing for this event at 6 AM, and to get ourselves hyped up for the day, we went to watch the sunrise on the dock of Memorial Union at 5 AM. I am not a morning person at all, but to get up and hang out with some of my favorite people and get ready for the crazy day we were about to have was well worth it. The president of WASB at the time jumped in the lake with one of our other members, and afterwards we all went to Gordon’s together to have breakfast. It was super silly and wholesome, and to me I think it perfectly showcases the beautiful friendship and camaraderie members of WASB have with each other.
What is the most valuable thing you’ve learned in your time with WASB?
I’ve learned that I am capable of so much more than I thought I was. Whether that be through planning a new event, taking on a leadership role, or just receiving endless support to take on personal endeavors from my fellow WASBs, I feel so much more motivated and passionate about trying new things and tackling the goals I have in my life. WASB has set me up with the skills I feel I need to take on nearly any challenge, and the support system I have gained through the organization will stay with me for the rest of my life.
What are some ways students can get involved with WASB?
So we have our Instagram, where you can see posts about all of our events and updates about us, as they’re happening throughout the semester. We also have a really fantastic website, which is gowasb.org and through that too, we also have ways you can get on our email list and receive emails about our events as they’re happening as well.
Are there any specific events coming up that you’re excited for?
Something that I’m looking forward to in the spring is our magnum opus of our programming which is our All-Campus Party, which will be the second to last week of April where we have a bunch of events going on all week that are fun, free things for students to do. We hand out free breakfast. We have an event that’s like a big scavenger hunt. We throw a block party at the end of the week that has a bunch of bands and free food and games and there’s all these cool things that you can do. I’m definitely looking forward to that in the spring. And something else that we’re doing is looking to introduce some new programming, both during that event and just one of our general standalone events during the semester, and we’re planning that for next semester. I’m really excited to kind of see that getting rolled out and all that coming to fruition.
What are some post-grad goals you have?
I am currently on the job hunt. I have been working in software engineering with robotics my past two summers in my internships, and really enjoyed that a lot. I’m still waiting to hear back from some places, but hoping to embark on a full time role and hopefully move back out to the East Coast is my dream. But of course I would never hate to dabble in still living in the Midwest for a little bit if something pops up for me in Chicago or Minneapolis.
Anything else you would like to share?
We’re always looking to collaborate with other student leaders and engage with what other student organizations are doing on this campus. So if anybody is interested in trying to partner with us for an event, or thinks that we could come up with something really interesting to make this school a better place for the student body, I would encourage those student leaders to reach out to me or us on our Instagram, or through our website. I also wanted to plug that we have applications for new members every semester. So if people want to ever apply, they should check our Instagram and our website regularly for more information on how to do that.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

What does it mean to write, to read or to be part of a literary community? What are the various roles of literature and how can it influence society around them?
While most do not extensively consider such questions, they dominate literary spheres and incite much debate. Even in the digital age, books and their contents continue to shape their surroundings — and for those interested in writing, reading and even specific issues, literary events provide the opportunity to observe exactly how.
Though many students do not realize it, Madison is home to a thriving literary community, including bookstores such asA Room of One’s Own,Lake City BooksandFrugal Muse Books,and hosting multiple authors on the University of Wisconsin campus and around the city. The annual culmination of this literary scene is theWisconsin Book Festival.Hosted through theMadison Public Library, the Festival runs year-round, though major events took place Oct. 17-20.
What is the Wisconsin Book Festival?
Wisconsin Book Festival director Jane Rotonda spoke about the event’s history and current operations. The Book Festival’s primary purpose is to present free public author events that celebrate books and spark discussion, according to Rotonda.
“Our goal is to talk about authors, talk with authors about books and celebrate reading and community through books, libraries and writing,” Rotonda said.
Rotonda said the Book Festival was created in 2001 but expanded in scope in 2013 once the Madison Public Library Foundation took responsibility for the festival’s leadership. According to Rotonda, the Book Festival has hosted 900 authors since 2013, including multiple New York Times Bestsellers, National Book Award Winners, Pulitzer Prize Winners and newcomers to the writing world.
Rotonda, an alumna of the University of Wisconsin, said she became involved with the Wisconsin Book Festival through her love of reading. Her favorite aspect of directing the festival (and the event in general) is its openness and accessibility — free of cost to attendees.
“There’s nothing like facilitating this event … people are coming together, regardless of their backgrounds or beliefs and are sharing in a special moment that doesn’t require much from them,” Rotonda said.
According to Rotonda, this year’s festival had 57 events across its four days and 69 visiting authors. Rotonda said the events did not have a specific theme in mind outside of being as inclusive and representative as possible.
Legacies in the present
On Oct. 17, the Wisconsin Book Festival hosted authors Tessa Hulls, Margaret Juhae Lee and Zara Chowdhary in acollaborative eventdiscussing their recent memoirs. The event was introduced and moderated by Laurie Dennis, the co-director of UW’s Center for East Asian Studies.
The three authors, who are close to one another and speak frequently, each wrote about their family histories, hence the event’s title — ‘Writing our Lineages.’
Hulls’ work, “Feeding Ghosts,” is a graphic novel-style memoir that addresses intergenerational trauma, the fear of experiencing strong emotions and the importance of relying on others instead of trapping oneself. She said the book partially stemmed from standing close to her mother’s pain and feeling her own.
Lee’s new memoir, “Starry Field,” is titled after a translation of her grandfather’s pen name. The memoir includes the narrative of Lee growing up, looking into how her grandfather’s legacy relates to Korean history and later passing on her family’s story to her children.
Chowdhary discussed her book, “The Lucky Ones.” The work centers around Chowdhary’s experience as a member of a multigenerational Muslim family during the 2002 Gujarat riots in India. The excerpt she read relates to the usage of words to cover awful actions, the theme of safety amidst others’ suffering and how one handles a family’s internal struggles alongside a larger social tragedy.
The three memoirists discussed their varying research into the historical and cultural backgrounds behind their family lives. They said they attempted to fill in absences about themselves and confront the erasure of history.The authors also discussed how writing books can reclaim one’s agency and the cathartic feelings stem from learning about family history. They said adulthood helped them understand their parents and grandparents as represented through their works.
The following event, hosted by the Center for East Asian Studies, featured author Wendy Chen, an assistant professor of Creative Writing at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and a member of the editorial board of magazines such as the Tupelo Quarterly.
Chen said her work was inspired by her family’s history during the Cold War in China and it covers multiple characters over different periods of Chinese history. The book originated as an epic poem but became a novel over time.
Chen said she immersed herself in specific times and places during the writing process in an attempt to reclaim what was lost during the Chinese Cultural Revolution. She suggested authors find a very specific audience, as small as a single person, to direct their work toward. In her case, she said she wrote for her childhood self who often wanted to read stories that resembled her family.
Chen said she translates her work and the work of texts written in languages such as Mandarin. According to Chen, one of her favorite aspects of literary events such as the Wisconsin Book Festival is the opportunity to communicate with readers and authors.
“So much of being a writer is [solitary] … going to book festivals is where you get to see the life of your work take off without you,” Chen said.
Chen said she combines her majors in creative writing and studio art to imagine her work in a visual space, both in narrative and form. She said she writes best in the early hours of the morning when her surroundings are dark and she can feel as though she is in a dream.
Chen said her upcoming work, “The Magpie at Night,” is a collection of a different form of her translations of Song-dynasty (spanning the 10th and 13th centuries) female poet and essayist Li Qingzhao’s works. According to Chen, translations can vary based on the translator’s interests and interpretation of the work they are transcribing.
“… Even if you try, there’s no way to erase your own voice in the mediums through which the author is speaking,” Chen said.
The four authors each wrote and intended to write very different works, but they shared an interest in documenting the past in a manner unique to their identities.
Stories and the environment
The Wisconsin Book Festival hosted internationally bestselling author Rachel Kushner as she discussed her newest work, “Creation Lake,” on Oct. 18. The story, which has been shortlisted for the 2024 Booker Prize, centers around a secret agent’s efforts to undermine a community of environmental activists.
The excerpt from “Creation Lake”that Kushner read evoked parallels between the characteristics of Neanderthals and modern society. Her prose shifted often between comedic commentary and introspective thought, yet managed to stay tonally appropriate.
Kushner said her work includes numerous allusions to real people and places. She said there are no inherent “politics” in people and that an interest in politics builds alongside ego and socialization. According to Kushner, her protagonist, Sadie Smith, is an example of someone who considers themselves outside of the norms of humanity, including a fascination with politics.
When discussing the writing process, Kushner said that when writing characters some require a biography to understand while others do not need one at all. Kushner also said she considers everything written for a book, regardless of if it is kept, to help an author understand their story more.
The Wisconsin Book Festival hosted authorTéa Obreht in a discussion of her newest release, “The Morningside,” on Oct. 19. The event was moderated by Professor Porter Shreve of UW’s Creative Writing Department.
“The Morningside”is set in a not-so-distant future dominated by environmental instability. In the excerpt Obreht read, the protagonist obsesses over a case file involving their mother that forms the crux of the story which is told years before its beginning.
Obreht said her environmental world-building relied on research and the deliberate choice of having her protagonist be around 12 years old, therefore having around as much knowledge of the setting as most of her readers. Obreht said another choice regarding her protagonists’ age was to allude to her own sense of cultural inexperience when she moved to the United States at a similar age.
According to Obreht, some of “The Morningside”’s dominant themes include human damage to the environment and the relationship between parents and children. She said her sympathy toward the protagonist’s mother increased after she had children.
“That feeling of … what you can offer your children was present in my space throughout [writing],” Obreht said.
In both their excerpts and discussions, Kushner and Obreht related their works to the current environmental condition of the earth.
Contemporary fantasy authors
Also on Oct. 19, the Wisconsin Book Festival featured Hugo Award-winning author Nghi Vo in a conversation focused on her newest novel, “The City in Glass.” The event was moderated by Gretchen Treu ofA Room of One’s Own Bookstore. Vo said “The City in Glass,” set during the fall of a city, required putting herself in the world she wrote. According to Vo, the story was partially inspired by her experience of the COVID-19 pandemic and the subsequent realization that there is no definitive end to the world.
“Every day a world ends, but a new world begins,” Vo said.
Vo said she first became interested in writing as a child when exposed to dictionaries and the ability of words to become building blocks of stories.
Vo, who attended the Wisconsin Book Festival last year, said her favorite aspect of it and similar events is being able to meet fans in a local setting. Vo said she especially enjoys the Wisconsin Book Festival’s dedication to diverse voices and underserved populations.
When asked about her interest in writing fantasy, Vo said she prefers the creative freedom that accompanies stories with magic or fictional beings. According to Vo, writing fantasy is also enjoyable due to its opportunity to blend real-life fun facts with fantastical elements.
“[In fantasy], if I want it beautiful or terrible, I can write it,” Vo said.
The Wisconsin Book Festival featured another fantasy author and New York Times Bestseller Lev Grossman in a discussion of his new Arthurian novel, “The Bright Sword,” on Oct. 20. The story took around 10 years to complete and stemmed from his fascination with King Arthur.
Grossman said that while it is difficult to determine if King Arthur truly existed, his representation in myths as the ideal king makes him politically relevant today. Grossman’s work explores the Arthurian world after the king’s death and the legacy his actions left behind.
Grossman said he prefers magic in his fantasy stories from his days of reading stories with magical elements as a child, but that magic does not define the genre. A recurring theme of his works, regardless of setting, is the realization of the world’s difficulties.
“[My characters] had to learn important life lessons of the difference between stories and reality,” Grossman said.
Grossman said that while his parents were both writers, he primarily became interested in the industry when he realized his talent for it in college.
Grossman said he enjoyed the Wisconsin Book Festival and similar events due to the opportunity to meet fans despite his isolated lifestyle. He also appreciated the opportunity to speak with fellow writers, including one of his inspirations Neil Stevenson, Grossman said.
According to Grossman, stories set in fictional settings can nonetheless represent real-life political issues. He said he was partially drawn to the story of King Arthur due to the figure’s relationship with modern political issues such as nativism.
“People underestimate the power of fantasy to speak directly to the kind of world we live in,” Grossman said.
Politics and literature
The Wisconsin Book Festival hosted author and political journalist Joseph O’Neill as he discussed his novel “Godwin,” on Oct. 19. The book’s narrative, consisting of two brothers searching for an African soccer prodigy, is inherently tied to political and social concepts such as colonialism and masculine attitudes, O’Neill said.
One of “Godwin”’s narrators is female, a decision made as a result of exhaustion with masculine voices in politics, O’Neill said. A substantial portion of the narrative rests on a Black character’s experience with a “white savior” and the complicated dynamic that follows.
O’Neill’s reading of “Godwin”showcased his ability to write in a stream-of-consciousness style. His narration read satirically, poking fun at the absurdity of modern ideas of masculinity, misogyny and racism.He said authors can write perspectives that are not necessarily their own. One of his protagonists, while not a bad man, is the unfortunate product of corporate greed.
O’Neill said he considers “Godwin”a political book, but also that all novels fit under that label.
“If you’re a political reader, then the novel you’re reading is a political novel,” O’Neill said.
Advocacy through writing
The Wisconsin Book Festival hosted Palestinian poet Mosab Abu Toha in a reading of his newest collection of poems, “Forest of Noise,” on Oct. 19. Most poems in the book were written in the last year and describe real people, Toha said.
Poems Toha read included “Dreams of a Child,” which contrasts the speaker’s childhood innocence with their current despair, “Under the Rubble,” describing those whose bodies are buried by debris, “My Library” which equates the speaker’s ability to write with advocacy and many more. Toha’s poems express his experiences so he can do his responsibility as a witness and artist – providing a different perspective from mainstream journalism.
“The stories I know are absent from the presentation of the Palestinian issue,” Toha said.
Toha also discussed the events leading up to the ongoing war in Gaza, as well as his efforts to build a library for Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
He has partially written in English to draw attention to many Western nations’ compliance with the ongoing conflict in Palestine.
“English is the language of loss and death to me,” Toha said.
Wisconsin Book Festival’s impact
Jane Rotonda said students should attend the Wisconsin Book Festival and similar events to feel a sense of the greater Madison community. The festival’s events provide students with the opportunity to connect with the world of academia and find their own perspectives on important topics.
“To have students engaging with the Book Festival … is only going to strengthen what we do in the future and how we amplify [young] voices,” Rotonda said.
Students can pitch ideas for Book Festival events and volunteer from behind the scenes. Rotonda said simply engaging with events, such as asking questions of authors, can amplify the overall success of the Book Festival.
The Wisconsin Book Festival provided an extensive schedule of engaging literary events, all thoughtful and inclusive. A diverse array of writers presented their perspectives on works fictional or inspired by their lives, each representing different definitions of what literature means.
Perhaps the effect of events such as the Wisconsin Book Festival is to allow attendees to reach their own conclusions about reading, writing and the world around them.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Badger Herald

An old man sits in his house alone on a cold Christmas eve in London when he hears a voice not from a living breathing creature, but the hollow spirit of his late business partnerJacob Marley.
Beginning with this strange but soon-to-be illuminating encounter, the old man Ebenezer Scrooge’s night would only become stranger and happier as it passes until the next morning he wakes up a different person.
Written by the famous British author Charles Dickens, “A Christmas Carol” is the story of the old miser Ebenezer Scrooge, who is met by three spirits known famously to the world as theghosts of Christmas past, present and future. Each ghost shows Scrooge a world that could be his, a world filled with joy, love and happiness, that he denies himself due to his parsimony.
The story begins with Scrooge’s encounter with his old business partner,Jacob, who warns Scrooge of being met by three spirits later in the night.
The first spirit, the ghost of Christmas past, reminds him of the past Christmases that Scrooge spent as a child, both the sadness he had felt and unconditional love.
The second spirit, the ghost of Christmas present, takes Scrooge to places of warmth and holiday spirit in the present. Finally, the Ghost of Christmas future shows him what a wonderful Christmas he could have if he changed. Scrooge wakes up the next morning as a changed man.
These spirits may have been Dickens’ imagination, but they live in us all and they remind us of the important things in life — the people we choose to spend the little time we have — through the Christmas Spirit.
As we celebrate this year’s Christmas wherever we are in place and life, the ghosts of Christmas remind us of who we were, who we are and who we can become and most importantly, the element that defines us is the love we give to people and receive in return.
As Susan Wolf famously said, the meaning of life comes not only from loving, but loving something worthy of love.
For Scrooge, it required four spirits and many years of misery to understand what he truly loved and the people who loved him. We have Dickens’ “A Christmas Carol,” which evokes our memories of the ghosts of “A Christmas Carol” to remind us of those who love us and those we rightly love.“A Christmas Carol” is being performed at the Overture Center by the Children’s Theater of Madison from Dec. 7 to Dec. 22.
Your donation will support the student journalists of University of Wisconsin-Madison. Your contribution will allow us to purchase equipment and cover our annual website hosting costs.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked*
Comment*
Name*
Email*

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
